difference is not greater between (say) _The Merchant of Venice_
and _King Lear_.

The technical feat which Ibsen here achieves of carrying through
without a single break the whole action of a four-act play has been
much commented on and admired.  The imaginary time of the drama is
actually shorter than the real time of representation, since the poet
does not even leave intervals for the changing of the scenes.  This
feat, however, is more curious than important.  Nothing particular
is gained by such a literal observance of the unity of time.  For
the rest, we feel definitely in _John Gabriel Borkman_ what we
already felt vaguely in _Little Eyolf_--that the poet's technical
staying-power is beginning to fail him.  We feel that the initial
design was larger and more detailed than the finished work.  If the
last acts of _The Wild Duck_ and _Hedda Gabler_ be compared with the
last acts of _Little Eyolf_ and _Borkman_, it will be seen that in
the earlier plays it relaxes towards the close, to make room for pure
imagination and lyric beauty.  The actual drama is over long before
the curtain falls on either play, and in the one case we have Rita
and Allmers, in the other Ella and Borkman, looking back over their
shattered lives and playing chorus to their own tragedy.  For my
part, I set the highest value on these choral odes, these mournful
antiphones, in which the poet definitely triumphs over the mere
playwright.  They seem to me noble and beautiful in themselves, and
as truly artistic, if not as theatrical, as any abrupter catastrophe
could be.  But I am not quite sure that they are exactly the
conclusions the poet originally projected, and still less am I
satisfied that they are reached by precisely the paths which he at
first designed to pursue.

The traces of a change of scheme in _John Gabriel Borkman_ seem to me
almost unmistakable.  The first two acts laid the foundation for a
larger and more complex superstructure than is ultimately erected.
Ibsen seems to have designed that Hinkel, the man who "betrayed"
Borkman in the past, should play some efficient part in the
alienation of Erhart from his family and home.  Otherwise, why this
insistence on a "party" at the Hinkels', which is apparently to serve
as a sort of "send-off" for Erhart and Mrs. Wilton?  It appears in
the third act that the "party" was imaginary.  "Erhart and I were
the whole party," says Mrs. Wilton, "and little Frida, of course."
We might, then, suppose it to have been a mere blind to enable Erhart
to escape from home; but, in the first place, as Erhart does not live
at home, there is no need for any such pretext; in the second place,
it appears that the trio do actually go to the Hinkels' house (since
Mrs. Borkman's servant finds them there), and do actually make it their
starting-point.  Erhart comes and goes with the utmost freedom in Mrs.
Wilton's own house; what possible reason can they have for not setting
out from there?  No reason is shown or hinted.  We cannot even imagine
that the Hinkels have been instrumental in bringing Erhart and Mrs.
Wilton together; it is expressly stated that Erhart made her
acquaintance and saw a great deal of her in town, before she moved out
to the country.  The whole conception of the party at the Hinkels' is,
as it stands, mysterious and a little cumbersome.  We are forced to
conclude, I think, that something more was at one time intended to
come of it, and that, when the poet abandoned the idea, he did not
think it worth while to remove the scaffolding.  To this change of
plan, too, we may possibly trace what I take to be the one serious
flaw in the the play--the comparative weakness of the second half of
the third act.  The scene of Erhart's rebellion against the claims
of the mother, aunt, and father strikes one as the symmetrical
working out of a problem rather than a passage of living drama.

All this means, of course, that there is a certain looseness of fibre
in _John Gabriel Borkman_ which we do not find in the best of Ibsen's
earlier works.  But in point of intellectual power and poetic beauty
it yields to none of its predecessors.  The conception of the three
leading figures is one of the great things of literature; the second
act, with the exquisite humour of the Foldal scene, and the dramatic
intensity of the encounter between Borkman and Ella, is perhaps the
finest single act Ibsen ever wrote, in prose at all events; and the
last scene is a thing of rare and exalted beauty.  One could wish
that the poet's last words to us had been those haunting lines with
which Gunhild and Ella join hands over Borkman's body:

     We twin sisters--over him we both have loved.
     We two shadows--over the dead man.

Among many verbal difficulties which this play presents, the greatest,
perhaps, has been to find an equivalent for the word "opreisning,"
which occurs again and again in the first and second acts.  No one
English word that I could discover would fit in all the different
contexts; so I have had to employ three: "redemption," "restoration,"
