nothing better to do than to study such publications as these?

MRS. ALVING. That is to say, you know nothing of what you are
condemning?

MANDERS. I have read enough about these writings to disapprove of them.

MRS. ALVING. Yes; but your own judgment--

MANDERS. My dear Mrs. Alving, there are many occasions in life when one
must rely upon others. Things are so ordered in this world; and it is
well that they are. Otherwise, what would become of society?

MRS. ALVING. Well, well, I daresay you're right there.

MANDERS. Besides, I of course do not deny that there may be much that
is attractive in such books. Nor can I blame you for wishing to keep
up with the intellectual movements that are said to be going on in the
great world-where you have let your son pass so much of his life. But--

MRS. ALVING. But?

MANDERS. [Lowering his voice.] But one should not talk about it, Mrs.
Alving. One is certainly not bound to account to everybody for what one
reads and thinks within one's own four walls.

MRS. ALVING. Of course not; I quite agree with you.

MANDERS. Only think, now, how you are bound to consider the interests
of this Orphanage, which you decided on founding at a time when--if
I understand you rightly--you thought very differently on spiritual
matters.

MRS. ALVING. Oh, yes; I quite admit that. But it was about the
Orphanage--

MANDERS. It was about the Orphanage we were to speak; yes. All I say
is: prudence, my dear lady! And now let us get to business. [Opens the
packet, and takes out a number of papers.] Do you see these?

MRS. ALVING. The documents?

MANDERS. All--and in perfect order. I can tell you it was hard work to
get them in time. I had to put on strong pressure. The authorities are
almost morbidly scrupulous when there is any decisive step to be taken.
But here they are at last. [Looks through the bundle.] See! here is the
formal deed of gift of the parcel of ground known as Solvik in the Manor
of Rosenvold, with all the newly constructed buildings, schoolrooms,
master's house, and chapel. And here is the legal fiat for the endowment
and for the Bye-laws of the Institution. Will you look at them? [Reads.]
"Bye-laws for the Children's Home to be known as 'Captain Alving's
Foundation.'"

MRS. ALVING. (Looks long at the paper.) So there it is.

MANDERS. I have chosen the designation "Captain" rather than
"Chamberlain." "Captain" looks less pretentious.

MRS. ALVING. Oh, yes; just as you think best.

MANDERS. And here you have the Bank Account of the capital lying at
interest to cover the current expenses of the Orphanage.

MRS. ALVING. Thank you; but please keep it--it will be more convenient.

MANDERS. With pleasure. I think we will leave the money in the Bank for
the present. The interest is certainly not what we could wish--four per
cent. and six months' notice of withdrawal. If a good mortgage could
be found later on--of course it must be a first mortgage and an
unimpeachable security--then we could consider the matter.

MRS. ALVING. Certainly, my dear Pastor Manders. You are the best judge
in these things.

MANDERS. I will keep my eyes open at any rate.--But now there is one
thing more which I have several times been intending to ask you.

MRS. ALVING. And what is that?

MANDERS. Shall the Orphanage buildings be insured or not?

MRS. ALVING. Of course they must be insured.

MANDERS. Well, wait a moment, Mrs. Alving. Let us look into the matter a
little more closely.

MRS. ALVING. I have everything insured; buildings and movables and stock
and crops.

MANDERS. Of course you have--on your own estate. And so have I--of
course. But here, you see, it is quite another matter. The Orphanage is
to be consecrated, as it were, to a higher purpose.

MRS. ALVING. Yes, but that's no reason--

MANDERS. For my own part, I should certainly not see the smallest
impropriety in guarding against all contingencies--

MRS. ALVING. No, I should think not.

MANDERS. But what is the general feeling in the neighbourhood? You, of
course, know better than I.

MRS. ALVING. Well--the general feeling--

MANDERS. Is there any considerable number of people--really responsible
people--who might be scandalised?

MRS. ALVING. What do you mean by "really responsible people"?

MANDERS. Well, I mean people in such independent and influential
positions that one cannot help attaching some weight to their opinions.

MRS. ALVING. There are several people of that sort here, who would very
likely be shocked if--

MANDERS. There, you see! In town we have many such people. Think of all
my colleague's adherents! People would be only too ready to interpret
our action as a sign that neither you nor I had the right faith in a
Higher Providence.

MRS. ALVING. But for your own part, my dear Pastor, you can at least
tell yourself that--

MANDERS. Yes, I know--I know; my conscience would be quite easy, that
is true enough. But nevertheless we should not escape grave
misinterpretation; and that might very likely react unfavourably upon
the Orphanage.
