sick and tired of all this goodness!

Johan: Tell me, Dina--is that the only reason you are coming away? Am I
nothing to you?

Dina: Yes, Johan, you are more to me than any one else in the world.

Johan: Oh, Dina--!

Dina: Every one here tells me I ought to hate and detest you--that it
is my duty; but I cannot see that it is my duty, and shall never be
able to.

Lona: No more you shall, my dear!

Martha: No, indeed you shall not; and that is why you shall go with him
as his wife.

Johan: Yes, yes!

Lona: What? Give me a kiss, Martha. I never expected that from you!

Martha: No, I dare say not; I would not have expected it myself. But I
was bound to break out some time! Ah, what we suffer under the tyranny
of habit and custom! Make a stand against that, Dina. Be his wife. Let
me see you defy all this convention.

Johan: What is your answer, Dina?

Dina: Yes, I will be your wife.

Johan: Dina!

Dina: But first of all I want to work--to make something of myself--as
you have done. I am not going to be merely a thing that is taken.

Lona: Quite right--that is the way.

Johan: Very well; I shall wait and hope--

Lona: And win, my boy! But now you must get on board!

Johan: Yes, on board! Ah, Lona, my dear sister, just one word with you.
Look here-- (He takes her into the background and talks hurriedly to
her.)

Martha: Dina, you lucky girl, let me look at you, and kiss you once
more--for the last time.

Dina: Not for the last time; no, my darling aunt, we shall meet again.

Martha: Never! Promise me, Dina, never to come back! (Grasps her hands
and looks at her.) Now go to your happiness, my dear child--across the
sea. How often, in my schoolroom, I have yearned to be over there! It
must be beautiful; the skies are loftier than here--a freer air plays
about your head--

Dina: Oh, Aunt Martha, some day you will follow us.

Martha: I? Never--never. I have my little vocation here, and now I
really believe I can live to the full the life that I ought.

Dina: I cannot imagine being parted from you.

Martha: Ah, one can part from much, Dina. (Kisses her.) But I hope you
may never experience that, my sweet child. Promise me to make him happy.

Dina: I will promise nothing; I hate promises; things must happen as
they will.

Martha: Yes, yes, that is true; only remain what you are--true and
faithful to yourself.

Dina: I will, aunt.

Lona (putting into her pocket some papers that JOHAN has given her):
Splendid, splendid, my dear boy. But now you must be off.

Johan: Yes, we have no time to waste now. Goodbye, Lona, and thank you
for all your love. Goodbye, Martha, and thank you, too, for your loyal
friendship.

Martha: Goodbye, Johan! Goodbye, Dina! And may you be happy all your
lives! (She and LONA hurry them to the door at the back. JOHAN and DINA
go quickly down the steps and through the garden. LONA shuts the door
and draws the curtains over it.)

Lona: Now we are alone, Martha. You have lost her and I him.

Martha: You--lost him?

Lona: Oh, I had already half lost him over there. The boy was longing
to stand on his own feet; that was why I pretended to be suffering from
homesickness.

Martha: So that was it? Ah, then I understand why you came. But he will
want you back, Lona.

Lona: An old step-sister--what use will he have for her now? Men break
many very dear ties to win their happiness.

Martha: That sometimes is so.

Lona: But we two will stick together, Martha.

Martha: Can I be anything to you?

Lona: Who more so? We two foster-sisters--haven't we both lost our
children? Now we are alone.

Martha: Yes, alone. And therefore, you ought to know this too--I loved
him more than anything in the world.

Lona: Martha! (Grasps her by the arm.) Is that true?

Martha: All my existence lies in those words. I have loved him and
waited for him. Every summer I waited for him to come. And then he
came--but he had no eyes for me.

Lona: You loved him! And it was you yourself that put his happiness
into his hands.

Martha: Ought I not to be the one to put his happiness into his hands,
since I loved him? Yes, I have loved him. All my life has been for him,
ever since he went away. What reason had I to hope, you mean? Oh, I
think I had some reason, all the same. But when he came back--then it
seemed as if everything had been wiped out of his memory. He had no
eyes for me.

Lona: It was Dina that overshadowed you, Martha?

Martha: And it is a good thing she did. At the time he went away, we
were of the same age; but when I saw him again--oh, that dreadful
moment!--I realised that now I was ten years older than he. He had gone
out into the bright sparkling sunshine, and breathed in youth and
health with every breath; and here I sat meanwhile, spinning and
spinning--

Lona: Spinning the thread of his happiness, Martha.

Martha: Yes, it was a golden thread I spun. No bitterness! We have been
two good sisters to him, haven't we, Lona?

Lona (throwing her arms round her): Martha!

(BERNICK comes in from his room.)

Bernick (to the other men, who are in his room): Yes, yes, arrange it
