that is what makes you dissatisfied with your lot.

Aune: It is not, Mr. Bernick; but I cannot bear to see one good workman
dismissed after another, to starve because of these machines.

Bernick: Hm! When the art of printing was discovered, many a
quill-driver was reduced to starvation.

Aune: Would you have admired the art so greatly if you had been a
quill-driver in those days, sir?

Bernick: I did not send for you to argue with you. I sent for you to
tell you that the "Indian Girl" must be ready to put to sea the day
after tomorrow.

Aune: But, Mr. Bernick--

Bernick: The day after tomorrow, do you hear?--at the same time as our
own ship, not an hour later. I have good reasons for hurrying on the
work. Have you seen today's paper? Well, then you know the pranks these
American sailors have been up to again. The rascally pack are turning
the whole town upside down. Not a night passes without some brawling in
the taverns or the streets--not to speak of other abominations.

Aune: Yes, they certainly are a bad lot.

Bernick: And who is it that has to bear the blame for all this
disorder? It is I! Yes, it is I who have to suffer for it. These
newspaper fellows are making all sorts of covert insinuations because
we are devoting all our energies to the "Palm Tree." I, whose task in
life it is to influence my fellow-citizens by the force of example,
have to endure this sort of thing cast in my face. I am not going to
stand that. I have no fancy for having my good name smirched in that
way.

Aune: Your name stands high enough to endure that and a great deal
more, sir.

Bernick: Not just now. At this particular moment I have need of all the
respect and goodwill my fellow-citizens can give me. I have a big
undertaking on, the stocks, as you probably have heard; but, if it
should happen that evil-disposed persons succeeded in shaking the
absolute confidence I enjoy, it might land me in the greatest
difficulties. That is why I want, at any price, to avoid these shameful
innuendoes in the papers, and that is why I name the day after tomorrow
as the limit of the time I can give you.

Aune: Mr. Bernick, you might just as well name this afternoon as the
limit.

Bernick: You mean that I am asking an impossibility?

Aune: Yes, with the hands we have now at the yard.

Bernick: Very good; then we must look about elsewhere.

Aune: Do you really mean, sir, to discharge still more of your old
workmen?

Bernick: No, I am not thinking of that.

Aune: Because I think it would cause bad blood against you both among
the townsfolk and in the papers, if you did that.

Bernick: Very probably; therefore, we will not do it. But, if the
"Indian Girl" is not ready to sail the day after tomorrow, I shall
discharge you.

Aune (with a start): Me! (He laughs.) You are joking, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: I should not be so sure of that, if I were you.

Aune: Do you mean that you can contemplate discharging me?--Me, whose
father and grandfather worked in your yard all their lives, as I have
done myself--?

Bernick: Who is it that is forcing me to do it?

Aune: You are asking what is impossible, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Oh, where there's a will there's a way. Yes or no; give me a
decisive answer, or consider yourself discharged on the spot.

Aune (coming a step nearer to him): Mr. Bernick, have you ever realised
what discharging an old workman means? You think he can look about for
another job? Oh, yes, he can do that; but does that dispose of the
matter? You should just be there once, in the house of a workman who
has been discharged, the evening he comes home bringing all his tools
with him.

Bernick: Do you think I am discharging you with a light heart? Have I
not always been a good master to you?

Aune: So much the worse, Mr. Bernick. Just for that very reason those
at home will not blame you; they will say nothing to me, because they
dare not; but they will look at me when I am not noticing, and think
that I must have deserved it. You see, sir, that is--that is what I
cannot bear. I am a mere nobody, I know; but I have always been
accustomed to stand first in my own home. My humble home is a little
community too, Mr. Bernick--a little community which I have been able
to support and maintain because my wife has believed in me and because
my children have believed in me. And now it is all to fall to pieces.

Bernick: Still, if there is nothing else for it, the lesser must go
down before the greater; the individual must be sacrificed to the
general welfare. I can give you no other answer; and that, and no
other, is the way of the world. You are an obstinate man, Aune! You are
opposing me, not because you cannot do otherwise, but because you will
not exhibit 'the superiority of machinery over manual labour'.

Aune: And you will not be moved, Mr. Bernick, because you know that if
you drive me away you will at all events have given the newspapers
proof of your good will.

Bernick: And suppose that were so? I have told you what it means for
me--either bringing the Press down on my back, or making them
