For then I still had the courage of a free will. I had no one else to
consider, nothing to turn me from my path. But then began what has
broken down my will and filled the whole of my life with dread and
wretchedness.

Rosmer. What--began? Speak so that I can understand you.

Rebecca. There came over me--a wild, uncontrollable passion--Oh, John--!

Rosmer. Passion? You--! For what?

Rebecca. For you.

Rosmer (getting up). What does this mean!

Rebecca (preventing him). Sit still, dear. I will tell you more about
it.

Rosmer. And you mean to say--that you have loved me--in that way!

Rebecca. I thought I might call it loving you--then. I thought it was
love. But it was not. It was what I have said--a wild, uncontrollable
passion.

Rosmer (speaking with difficulty). Rebecca--is it really you--you--who
are sitting here telling me this?

Rebecca. Yes, indeed it is, John.

Rosmer. Then it was as the outcome of this--and under the influence of
this--that you "acted," as you called it.

Rebecca. It swept over me like a storm over the sea--like one of the
storms we have in winter in the north. They catch you up and rush you
along with them, you know, until their fury is expended. There is no
withstanding them.

Rosmer. So it swept poor unhappy Beata into the mill-race.

Rebecca. Yes--it was like a fight for life between Beata and me at that
time.

Rosmer. You proved the strongest of us all at Rosmersholm--stronger
than both Beata and me put together.

Rebecca. I knew you well enough to know that I could not get at you in
any way until you were set free--both in actual circumstances and in
your soul.

Rosmer. But I do not understand you, Rebecca. You--you yourself and
your whole conduct--are an insoluble riddle to me. I am free now--both
in my soul and my circumstances. You are absolutely in touch with the
goal you set before yourself from the beginning. And nevertheless--

Rebecca. I have never stood farther from my goal than I do now.

Rosmer. And nevertheless, I say, when yesterday I asked you--urged
you--to become my wife, you cried out that it never could be.

Rebecca. I cried out in despair, John.

Rosmer. Why?

Rebecca. Because Rosmersholm has unnerved me. All the courage has been
sapped out of my will here--crushed out! The time has gone for me to
dare risk anything whatever. I have lost all power of action, John.

Rosmer. Tell me how that has come about.

Rebecca. It has come about through my living with you.

Rosmer. But how? How?

Rebecca. When I was alone with you here--and you had really found
yourself--

Rosmer. Yes, yes?

Rebecca. For you never really found yourself as long as Beata was
Alive--

Rosmer. Alas, you are right in that.

Rebecca. When it came about that I was living together with you here,
in peace and solitude--when you exchanged all your thoughts with me
unreservedly--your every mood, however tender or intimate--then the
great change happened in me. Little by little, you understand. Almost
imperceptibly--but overwhelmingly in the end, till it reached the
uttermost depths of my soul.

Rosmer. What does this mean, Rebecca?

Rebecca. All the other feeling--all that horrible passion that had
drowned my better self--left me entirely. All the violent emotions that
had been roused in me were quelled and silenced. A peace stole over my
soul--a quiet like that of one of our mountain peaks up under the
midnight sun.

Rosmer. Tell me more of it--all that you can.

Rebecca. There is not much more to tell. Only that this was how love
grew up in my heart--a great, self-denying love--content with such a
union of hearts as there has been between us two.

Rosmer. Oh, if only I had had the slightest suspicion of all this!

Rebecca. It is best as it is. Yesterday, when you asked me if I would
be your wife, I gave a cry of joy--

Rosmer. Yes, it was that, Rebecca, was it not! I thought that was what
it meant.

Rebecca. For a moment, yes-I forgot myself for a moment. It was my
dauntless will of the old days that was struggling to be free again.
But now it has no more strength--it has lost it for ever.

Rosmer. How do you explain what has taken place in you?

Rebecca. It is the Rosmer attitude towards life-or your attitude
towards life, at any rate--that has infected my will.

Rosmer. Infected?

Rebecca. Yes, and made it sickly--bound it captive under laws that
formerly had no meaning for me. You--my life together with you--have
ennobled my soul--

Rosmer. Ah, if I dared believe that to be true!

Rebecca. You may believe it confidently. The Rosmer attitude towards
life ennobles. But-(shakes her head)-but-but--

Rosmer. But? Well?

Rebecca. But it kills joy, you know.

Rosmer. Do you say that, Rebecca?

Rebecca. For me, at all events.

Rosmer. Yes, but are you so sure of that? If I asked you again now--?
Implored you--?

Rebecca. Oh, my dear--never go back to that again! It is impossible.
Yes, impossible--because I must tell you this, John. I have a--past
behind me.

Rosmer. Something more than you have told me?
