I am the same as I always was.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, yes--don't let us talk any more about the old days.
You are buried up to your eyes now in committees and all sorts of
business; and I am here, fighting with ghosts both without and within
me.

Manders. I can at all events help you to get the better of those
without you. After all that I have been horrified to hear you from
today, I cannot conscientiously allow a young defenceless girl to
remain in your house.

Mrs. Alving. Don't you think it would be best if we could get her
settled?--by some suitable marriage, I mean.

Manders. Undoubtedly. I think, in any case, it would have been
desirable for her. Regina is at an age now that--well, I don't know
much about these things, but--

Mrs. Alving. Regina developed very early.

Manders. Yes, didn't she. I fancy I remember thinking she was
remarkably well developed, bodily, at the time I prepared her for
Confirmation. But, for the time being, she must in any case go home.
Under her father's care--no, but of course Engstrand is not. To think
that he, of all men, could so conceal the truth from me! (A knock is
heard at the hall door.)

Mrs. Alving. Who can that be? Come in!

(ENGSTRAND, dressed in his Sunday clothes, appears in the doorway.)

Engstrand. I humbly beg pardon, but--

Manders. Aha! Hm!

Mrs. Alving. Oh, it's you, Engstrand!

Engstrand. There were none of the maids about, so I took the great
liberty of knocking.

Mrs. Alving. That's all right. Come in. Do you want to speak to me?

Engstrand (coming in). No, thank you very much, ma'am. It was Mr.
Menders I wanted to speak to for a moment.

Manders (walking up and down). Hm!--do you. You want to speak to me, do
you?

Engstrand. Yes, sir, I wanted so very much to--

Manders (stopping in front of him). Well, may I ask what it is you want?

Engstrand. It's this way, Mr. Manders. We are being paid off now. And
many thanks to you, Mrs. Alving. And now the work is quite finished, I
thought it would be so nice and suitable if all of us, who have worked
so honestly together all this time, were to finish up with a few
prayers this evening.

Manders. Prayers? Up at the Orphanage?

Engstrand. Yes, sir, but if it isn't agreeable to you, then--

Manders. Oh, certainly--but--hm!--

Engstrand. I have made a practice of saying a few prayers there myself
each evening.

Mrs. Alving. Have you?

Engstrand. Yes, ma'am, now--and then--just as a little edification, so
to speak. But I am only a poor common man, and haven't rightly the
gift, alas--and so I thought that as Mr. Manders happened to be here,
perhaps--

Manders. Look here, Engstrand! First of all I must ask you a question.
Are you in a proper frame of mind for such a thing? Is your conscience
free and untroubled?

Engstrand. Heaven have mercy on me a sinner! My conscience isn't worth
our speaking about, Mr. Manders.

Manders. But it is just what we must speak about. What do you say to my
question?

Engstrand. My conscience? Well--it's uneasy sometimes, of course.

Manders. Ah, you admit that at all events. Now will you tell me,
without any concealment--what is your relationship to Regina?

Mrs. Alving (hastily). Mr. Manders!

Manders (calming her).--Leave it to me!

Engstrand. With Regina? Good Lord, how you frightened me! (Looks at MRS
ALVING.) There is nothing wrong with Regina, is there?

Manders. Let us hope not. What I want to know is, what is your
relationship to her? You pass as her father, don't you?

Engstrand (unsteadily): Well--hm!--you know, sir, what happened between
me and my poor Joanna.

Manders. No more distortion of the truth! Your late wife made a full
confession to Mrs. Alving, before she left her service...

Engstrand. What!--do you mean to say--? Did she do that after all?

Manders. You see it has all come out, Engstrand.

Engstrand. Do you mean to say that she, who gave me her promise and
solemn oath--

Manders. Did she take an oath?

Engstrand. Well, no--she only gave me her word, but as seriously as a
woman could.

Manders. And all these years you have been hiding the truth from
me--from me, who have had such complete and absolute faith in you.

Engstrand. I am sorry to say I have, sir.

Manders. Did I deserve that from you, Engstrand? Haven't I been always
ready to help you in word and deed as far as lay in my power? Answer
me! Is it not so?

Engstrand. Indeed there's many a time I should have been very badly off
without you, sir.

Manders. And this is the way you repay me--by causing me to make false
entries in the church registers, and afterwards keeping back from me
for years the information which you owed it both to me and to your
sense of the truth to divulge. Your conduct has been absolutely
inexcusable, Engstrand, and from today everything is at an end between
us.

Engstrand (with a sigh). Yes, I can see that's what it means.

Manders. Yes, because how can you possibly justify what you did?

Engstrand. Was the poor girl to go and increase her load of shame by
talking about it? Just suppose, sir, for a moment that your reverence
