
Hilmar: But the decisive battle has not been fought yet.

Bernick: In the matter of the railway, do you mean?

Hilmar: Yes; I suppose you know the trouble that Hammer is brewing?

Bernick (anxiously): No, what is that?

Hilmar: Oh, he is greatly taken up with the rumour that is going
around, and is preparing to dish up an article about it.

Bernick: What rumour?

Hilmar: About the extensive purchase of property along the branch line,
of course.

Bernick: What? Is there such a rumour as that going about?

Hilmar: It is all over the town. I heard it at the club when I looked
in there. They say that one of our lawyers has quietly bought up, on
commission, all the forest land, all the mining land, all the
waterfalls--

Bernick: Don't they say whom it was for?

Hilmar: At the club they thought it must be for some company, not
connected with this town, that has got a hint of the scheme you have in
hand, and has made haste to buy before the price of these properties
went up. Isn't it villainous?--ugh!

Bernick: Villainous?

Hilmar: Yes, to have strangers putting their fingers into our pie--and
one of our own local lawyers lending himself to such a thing! And now
it will be outsiders that will get all the profits!

Bernick: But, after all, it is only an idle rumour.

Hilmar: Meanwhile people are believing it, and tomorrow or the next
day, I have no doubt Hammer will nail it to the counter as a fact.
There is a general sense of exasperation in the town already. I heard
several people say that if the rumour were confirmed they would take
their names off the subscription lists.

Bernick: Impossible!

Hilmar: Is it? Why do you suppose these mercenary-minded creatures were
so willing to go into the undertaking with you? Don't you suppose they
have scented profit for themselves--

Bernick: It is impossible, I am sure; there is so much public spirit in
our little community--

Hilmar: In our community? Of course you are a confirmed optimist, and
so you judge others by yourself. But I, who am a tolerably experienced
observer--! There isn't a single soul in the place--excepting
ourselves, of course--not a single soul in the place who holds up the
banner of the Ideal. (Goes towards the verandah.) Ugh, I can see them
there--

Bernick: See whom?

Hilmar: Our two friends from America. (Looks out to the right.) And who
is that they are walking with? As I am alive, if it is not the captain
of the "Indian Girl." Ugh!

Bernick: What can they want with him?

Hilmar. Oh, he is just the right company for them. He looks as if he
had been a slave-dealer or a pirate; and who knows what the other two
may have been doing all these years.

Bernick: Let me tell you that it is grossly unjust to think such things
about them.

Hilmar: Yes--you are an optimist. But here they are, bearing down upon
us again; so I will get away while there is time. (Goes towards the
door on the left. LONA comes in from the right.)

Lona: Oh, Hilmar, am I driving you away?

Hilmar: Not at all; I am in rather a hurry; I want to have a word with
Betty. (Goes into the farthest room on the left.)

Bernick (after a moment's silence): Well, Lona?

Lona: Yes?

Bernick: What do you think of me today?

Lona: The same as I did yesterday. A lie more or less--

Bernick: I must enlighten you about it. Where has Johan gone?

Lona: He is coming; he had to see a man first.

Bernick: After what you heard yesterday, you will understand that my
whole life will be ruined if the truth comes to light.

Lona: I can understand that.

Bernick: Of course, it stands to reason that I was not guilty of the
crime there was so much talk about here.

Lona: That stands to reason. But who was the thief?

Bernick: There was no thief. There was no money stolen--not a penny.

Lona: How is that?

Bernick: Not a penny, I tell you.

Lona: But those rumours? How did that shameful rumour get about that
Johan--

Bernick: Lona, I think I can speak to you as I could to no one else. I
will conceal nothing from you. I was partly to blame for spreading the
rumour.

Lona: You? You could act in that way towards a man who for your sake--!

Bernick: Do not condemn me without bearing in mind how things stood at
that time. I told you about it yesterday. I came home and found my
mother involved in a mesh of injudicious undertakings; we had all
manner of bad luck--it seemed as if misfortunes were raining upon us,
and our house was on the verge of ruin. I was half reckless and half in
despair. Lona, I believe it was mainly to deaden my thoughts that I let
myself drift into that entanglement that ended in Johan's going away.

Lona: Hm--

Bernick: You can well imagine how every kind of rumour was set on foot
after you and he had gone. People began to say that it was not his
first piece of folly--that Dorf had received a large sum of money to
hold his tongue and go away; other people said that she had received
it. At the same time it was obvious that our house was finding it
difficult to meet its obligations. What was more natural than that
