your tongue about any matters that do not concern the public. That is
my opinion.

Rosmer. I see. Then you would not risk having anything to do with me if
I were to confess my apostasy openly?

Mortensgaard (shaking his head). I should not like to, Mr. Rosmer.
Lately I have made it a rule never to support anybody or anything that
is opposed to the interests of the Church.

Rosmer. Have you, then, entered the fold of the Church again lately?

Mortensgaard. That is another matter altogether.

Rosmer. Oh, that is how it is. Yes, I understand you now.

Mortensgaard. Mr. Rosmer--you ought to remember that I, of all people,
have not absolute freedom of action.

Rosmer. What hampers you?

Mortensgaard. What hampers me is that I am a marked man.

Rosmer. Ah--of course.

Mortensgaard. A marked man, Mr. Rosmer. And you, of all people, ought
to remember that--because you were responsible, more than any one else,
for my being branded.

Rosmer. If I had stood then where I stand now, I should have handled
the affair more judiciously.

Mortensgaard. I think so too. But it is too late now; you have branded
me, once for all--branded me for life. I do not suppose you can fully
realise what such a thing means. But it is possible that you may soon
feel the smart of it yourself now, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. I?

Mortensgaard. Yes. You surely do not suppose that Mr. Kroll and his
gang will be inclined to forgive a rupture such as yours? And the
"County News" is going to be pretty bloodthirsty, I hear. It may very
well come to pass that you will be a marked man, too.

Rosmer. On personal grounds, Mr. Mortensgaard, I feel myself to be
invulnerable. My conduct does not offer any point of attack.

Mortensgaard (with a quiet smile). That is saying a good deal, Mr.
Rosmer.

Rosmer. Perhaps it is. But I have the right to say as much.

Mortensgaard. Even if you were inclined to overhaul your conduct as
thoroughly as you once overhauled mine?

Rosmer. You say that very strangely. What are you driving at?--is it
anything definite?

Mortensgaard. Yes, there is one definite thing--no more than a single
one. But it might be quite awkward enough if malicious opponents got a
hint of it.

Rosmer. Will you have the kindness to tell me what on earth it is?

Mortensgaard. Can you not guess, Mr. Rosmer?

Rosmer. No, not for a moment.

Mortensgaard. All right. I must come out with it, then. I have in my
possession a remarkable letter, that was written here at Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Miss West's letter, you mean? Is it so remarkable?

Mortensgaard. No, that letter is not remarkable. But I received a
letter from this house on another occasion.

Rosmer. From Miss West?

Mortensgaard. No, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. Well, from whom, then? From whom?

Mortensgaard. From your late wife.

Rosmer. From my wife? You had a letter from my wife?

Mortensgaard. Yes, I did.

Rosmer. When?

Mortensgaard. It was during the poor lady's last days. It must be about
a year and a half ago now. And that is the letter that is so remarkable.

Rosmer. Surely you know that my wife's mind was affected at that time?

Mortensgaard. I know there were a great many people who thought so.
But, in my opinion, no one would have imagined anything of the kind
from the letter. When I say the letter is a remarkable one, I mean
remarkable in quite another way.

Rosmer. And what in the world did my poor wife find to write to you
about?

Mortensgaard. I have the letter at home. It begins more or less to the
effect that she is living in perpetual terror and dread, because of the
fact that there are so many evilly disposed people about her whose only
desire is to do you harm and mischief.

Rosmer. Me?

Mortensgaard. Yes, so she says. And then follows the most remarkable
part of it all. Shall I tell you, Mr. Rosmer?

Rosmer. Of course! Tell me everything, without any reserve.

Mortensgaard. The poor lady begs and entreats me to be magnanimous. She
says that she knows it was you, who got me dismissed from my post as
schoolmaster, and implores me most earnestly not to revenge myself upon
you.

Rosmer. What way did she think you could revenge yourself, then?

Mortensgaard. The letter goes on to say that if I should hear that
anything sinful was going on at Rosmersholm, I was not to believe a
word of it; that it would be only the work of wicked folk who were
spreading the rumours on purpose to do you harm.

Rosmer. Does the letter say that?

Mortensgaard. You may read it at your convenience, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. But I cannot understand--? What did she imagine there could be
any wicked rumours about?

Mortensgaard. In the first place, that you had broken away from the
faith of your childhood. Mrs. Rosmer denied that absolutely--at that
time. And, in the next place--ahem!

Rosmer. In the next place?

Mortensgaard. Well, in the next place she writes--though rather
confusedly--that she has no knowledge of any sinful relations existing
at Rosmersholm; that she has never been wronged in any way; and that if
any rumours of that sort should get about, she entreats me not to
