tell you!

Petra. But, father, tell us what it is.

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, yes--only give me time, and you shall know all
about it. If only I had Peter here now! It just shows how we men can go
about forming our judgments, when in reality we are as blind as any
moles--

Hovstad. What are you driving at, Doctor?

Dr. Stockmann (standing still by the table). Isn't it the universal
opinion that our town is a healthy spot?

Hovstad. Certainly.

Dr. Stockmann. Quite an unusually healthy spot, in fact--a place that
deserves to be recommended in the warmest possible manner either for
invalids or for people who are well--

Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, but my dear Thomas--

Dr. Stockmann. And we have been recommending it and praising it--I have
written and written, both in the "Messenger" and in pamphlets...

Hovstad. Well, what then?

Dr. Stockmann. And the Baths--we have called them the "main artery of
the town's life-blood," the "nerve-centre of our town," and the devil
knows what else--

Billing. "The town's pulsating heart" was the expression I once used on
an important occasion.

Dr. Stockmann. Quite so. Well, do you know what they really are, these
great, splendid, much praised Baths, that have cost so much money--do
you know what they are?

Hovstad. No, what are they?

Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, what are they?

Dr. Stockmann. The whole place is a pest-house!

Petra. The Baths, father?

Mrs. Stockmann (at the same time), Our Baths?

Hovstad. But, Doctor--

Billing. Absolutely incredible!

Dr. Stockmann. The whole Bath establishment is a whited, poisoned
sepulchre, I tell you--the gravest possible danger to the public
health! All the nastiness up at Molledal, all that stinking filth, is
infecting the water in the conduit-pipes leading to the reservoir; and
the same cursed, filthy poison oozes out on the shore too--

Horster. Where the bathing-place is?

Dr. Stockmann. Just there.

Hovstad. How do you come to be so certain of all this, Doctor?

Dr. Stockmann. I have investigated the matter most conscientiously. For
a long time past I have suspected something of the kind. Last year we
had some very strange cases of illness among the visitors--typhoid
cases, and cases of gastric fever--

Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, that is quite true.

Dr. Stockmann. At the time, we supposed the visitors had been infected
before they came; but later on, in the winter, I began to have a
different opinion; and so I set myself to examine the water, as well as
I could.

Mrs. Stockmann. Then that is what you have been so busy with?

Dr. Stockmann. Indeed I have been busy, Katherine. But here I had none
of the necessary scientific apparatus; so I sent samples, both of the
drinking-water and of the sea-water, up to the University, to have an
accurate analysis made by a chemist.

Hovstad. And have you got that?

Dr. Stockmann (showing him the letter). Here it is! It proves the
presence of decomposing organic matter in the water--it is full of
infusoria. The water is absolutely dangerous to use, either internally
or externally.

Mrs. Stockmann. What a mercy you discovered it in time.

Dr. Stockmann. You may well say so.

Hovstad. And what do you propose to do now, Doctor?

Dr. Stockmann. To see the matter put right, naturally.

Hovstad. Can that be done?

Dr. Stockmann. It must be done. Otherwise the Baths will be absolutely
useless and wasted. But we need not anticipate that; I have a very
clear idea what we shall have to do.

Mrs. Stockmann. But why have you kept this all so secret, dear?

Dr. Stockmann. Do you suppose I was going to run about the town
gossiping about it, before I had absolute proof? No, thank you. I am
not such a fool.

Petra. Still, you might have told us--

Dr. Stockmann. Not a living soul. But tomorrow you may run around to
the old Badger--

Mrs. Stockmann. Oh, Thomas! Thomas!

Dr. Stockmann. Well, to your grandfather, then. The old boy will have
something to be astonished at! I know he thinks I am cracked--and there
are lots of other people who think so too, I have noticed. But now
these good folks shall see--they shall just see! (Walks about, rubbing
his hands.) There will be a nice upset in the town, Katherine; you
can't imagine what it will be. All the conduit-pipes will have to be
relaid.

Hovstad (getting up). All the conduit-pipes--?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, of course. The intake is too low down; it will have
to be lifted to a position much higher up.

Petra. Then you were right after all.

Dr. Stockmann. Ah, you remember, Petra--I wrote opposing the plans
before the work was begun. But at that time no one would listen to me.
Well, I am going to let them have it now.  Of course I have prepared a
report for the Baths Committee; I have had it ready for a week, and was
only waiting for this to come. (Shows the letter.) Now it shall go off
at once. (Goes into his room and comes back with some papers.) Look at
that! Four closely written sheets!--and the letter shall go with them.
Give me a bit of paper, Katherine--something to wrap them up in. That
