
Dr. Stockmann (standing still in front of him). Why couldn't you
consult me about it, before you went and bought all that trash?

Morten Kiil. What is done cannot be undone.

Dr. Stockmann (walks about uneasily). If only I were not so certain
about it--! But I am absolutely convinced that I am right.

Morten Kiil (weighing the pocket-book in his hand). If you stick to
your mad idea, this won't be worth much, you know. (Puts the
pocket-book in his pocket.)

Dr. Stockmann. But, hang it all! It might be possible for science to
discover some prophylactic, I should think--or some antidote of some
kind--

Morten Kiil. To kill these animals, do you mean?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, or to make them innocuous.

Morten Kiil. Couldn't you try some rat's-bane?

Dr. Stockmann. Don't talk nonsense! They all say it is only
imagination, you know. Well, let it go at that! Let them have their own
way about it! Haven't the ignorant, narrow-minded curs reviled me as an
enemy of the people?--and haven't they been ready to tear the clothes
off my back too?

Morten Kiil. And broken all your windows to pieces!

Dr. Stockmann. And then there is my duty to my family. I must talk it
over with Katherine; she is great on those things.

Morten Kiil. That is right; be guided by a reasonable woman's advice.

Dr. Stockmann (advancing towards him). To think you could do such a
preposterous thing!  Risking Katherine's money in this way, and putting
me in such a horribly painful dilemma! When I look at you, I think I
see the devil himself--.

Morten Kiil. Then I had better go. But I must have an answer from you
before two o'clock--yes or no. If it is no, the shares go to a charity,
and that this very day.

Dr. Stockmann. And what does Katherine get?

Morten Kiil. Not a halfpenny. (The door leading to the hall opens, and
HOVSTAD and ASLAKSEN make their appearance.) Look at those two!

Dr. Stockmann (staring at them). What the devil!--have YOU actually the
face to come into my house?

Hovstad. Certainly.

Aslaksen. We have something to say to you, you see.

Morten Kiil (in a whisper). Yes or no--before two o'clock.

Aslaksen (glancing at HOVSTAD). Aha! (MORTEN KIIL goes out.)

Dr. Stockmann. Well, what do you want with me? Be brief.

Hovstad. I can quite understand that you are annoyed with us for our
attitude at the meeting yesterday.

Dr. Stockmann. Attitude, do you call it? Yes, it was a charming
attitude! I call it weak, womanish--damnably shameful!

Hovstad. Call it what you like, we could not do otherwise.

Dr. Stockmann. You DARED not do otherwise--isn't that it?

Hovstad. Well, if you like to put it that way.

Aslaksen. But why did you not let us have word of it beforehand?--just
a hint to Mr. Hovstad or to me?

Dr. Stockmann. A hint? Of what?

Aslaksen. Of what was behind it all.

Dr. Stockmann. I don't understand you in the least--

Aslaksen (with a confidential nod). Oh yes, you do, Dr. Stockmann.

Hovstad. It is no good making a mystery of it any longer.

Dr. Stockmann (looking first at one of them and then at the other).
What the devil do you both mean?

Aslaksen. May I ask if your father-in-law is not going round the town
buying up all the shares in the Baths?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, he has been buying Baths shares today; but--

Aslaksen. It would have been more prudent to get someone else to do
it--someone less nearly related to you.

Hovstad. And you should not have let your name appear in the affair.
There was no need for anyone to know that the attack on the Baths came
from you. You ought to have consulted me, Dr. Stockmann.

Dr. Stockmann (looks in front of him; then a light seems to dawn on him
and he says in amazement.) Are such things conceivable? Are such things
possible?

Aslaksen (with a smile). Evidently they are. But it is better to use a
little finesse, you know.

Hovstad. And it is much better to have several persons in a thing of
that sort; because the responsibility of each individual is lessened,
when there are others with him.

Dr. Stockmann (composedly). Come to the point, gentlemen. What do you
want?

Aslaksen. Perhaps Mr. Hovstad had better--

Hovstad. No, you tell him, Aslaksen.

Aslaksen. Well, the fact is that, now we know the bearings of the whole
affair, we think we might venture to put the "People's Messenger" at
your disposal.

Dr. Stockmann. Do you dare do that now? What about public opinion? Are
you not afraid of a storm breaking upon our heads?

Hovstad. We will try to weather it.

Aslaksen. And you must be ready to go off quickly on a new tack,
Doctor. As soon as your invective has done its work--

Dr. Stockmann. Do you mean, as soon as my father-in-law and I have got
hold of the shares at a low figure?

Hovstad. Your reasons for wishing to get the control of the Baths are
mainly scientific, I take it.

Dr. Stockmann. Of course; it was for scientific reasons that I
persuaded the old "Badger" to stand in with me in the matter. So we
will tinker at the conduit-pipes a little, and dig up a little bit of
the shore, and it shan't cost the town a sixpence. That will be all
