Hovstad. And as for you, Mr. Billing, I should think it is time for you
to be taking in a reef or two in your sails, seeing that you are
applying for the post of secretary to the Bench.

Billing. I--!

Hovstad. Are you, Billing?

Billing. Well, yes--but you must clearly understand I am only doing it
to annoy the bigwigs.

Aslaksen. Anyhow, it is no business of mine. But if I am to be accused
of timidity and of inconsistency in my principles, this is what I want
to point out: my political past is an open book. I have never changed,
except perhaps to become a little more moderate, you see. My heart is
still with the people; but I don't deny that my reason has a certain
bias towards the authorities--the local ones, I mean. (Goes into the
printing room.)

Billing. Oughtn't we to try and get rid of him, Hovstad?

Hovstad. Do you know anyone else who will advance the money for our
paper and printing bill?

Billing. It is an infernal nuisance that we don't possess some capital
to trade on.

Hovstad (sitting down at his desk). Yes, if we only had that, then--

Billing. Suppose you were to apply to Dr. Stockmann?

Hovstad (turning over some papers). What is the use? He has got nothing.

Billing. No, but he has got a warm man in the background, old Morten
Kiil--"the Badger," as they call him.

Hovstad (writing). Are you so sure he has got anything?

Billing. Good Lord, of course he has! And some of it must come to the
Stockmanns. Most probably he will do something for the children, at all
events.

Hovstad (turning half round). Are you counting on that?

Billing. Counting on it? Of course I am not counting on anything.

Hovstad. That is right. And I should not count on the secretaryship to
the Bench either, if I were you; for I can assure you--you won't get it.

Billing. Do you think I am not quite aware of that? My object is
precisely not to get it. A slight of that kind stimulates a man's
fighting power--it is like getting a supply of fresh bile--and I am
sure one needs that badly enough in a hole-and-corner place like this,
where it is so seldom anything happens to stir one up.

Hovstad (writing). Quite so, quite so.

Billing. Ah, I shall be heard of yet!--Now I shall go and write the
appeal to the Householders' Association. (Goes into the room on the
right.)

Hovstad (sitting al his desk, biting his penholder, says slowly).
Hm!--that's it, is it. (A knock is heard.) Come in! (PETRA comes in by
the outer door. HOVSTAD gets up.) What, you!--here?

Petra. Yes, you must forgive me--

Hovstad (pulling a chair forward). Won't you sit down?

Petra. No, thank you; I must go again in a moment.

Hovstad. Have you come with a message from your father, by any chance?

Petra. No, I have come on my own account. (Takes a book out of her coat
pocket.) Here is the English story.

Hovstad. Why have you brought it back?

Petra. Because I am not going to translate it.

Hovstad. But you promised me faithfully.

Petra. Yes, but then I had not read it, I don't suppose you have read
it either?

Hovstad. No, you know quite well I don't understand English; but--

Petra. Quite so. That is why I wanted to tell you that you must find
something else. (Lays the book on the table.) You can't use this for
the "People's Messenger."

Hovstad. Why not?

Petra. Because it conflicts with all your opinions.

Hovstad. Oh, for that matter--

Petra. You don't understand me. The burden of this story is that there
is a supernatural power that looks after the so-called good people in
this world and makes everything happen for the best in their
case--while all the so-called bad people are punished.

Hovstad. Well, but that is all right. That is just what our readers
want.

Petra. And are you going to be the one to give it to them? For myself,
I do not believe a word of it. You know quite well that things do not
happen so in reality.

Hovstad. You are perfectly right; but an editor cannot always act as he
would prefer. He is often obliged to bow to the wishes of the public in
unimportant matters. Politics are the most important thing in life--for
a newspaper, anyway; and if I want to carry my public with me on the
path that leads to liberty and progress, I must not frighten them away.
If they find a moral tale of this sort in the serial at the bottom of
the page, they will be all the more ready to read what is printed above
it; they feel more secure, as it were.

Petra. For shame! You would never go and set a snare like that for your
readers; you are not a spider!

Hovstad (smiling). Thank you for having such a good opinion of me. No;
as a matter of fact that is Billing's idea and not mine.

Petra. Billing's!

Hovstad. Yes; anyway, he propounded that theory here one day. And it is
Billing who is so anxious to have that story in the paper; I don't know
anything about the book.

Petra. But how can Billing, with his emancipated views--

Hovstad. Oh, Billing is a many-sided man. He is applying for the post
of secretary to the Bench, too, I hear.

Petra. I don't believe it, Mr. Hovstad. How could he possibly bring
