God forbid I should be the one to spread such reports.

Mrs. Holt:  Well, anyway, Mrs. Dorf didn't get the money, because she--

Mrs. Lynge:  Yes, what happened to Dina's parents afterwards?

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, Dorf deserted both his wife and his child. But
madam was impudent enough to stay here a whole year. Of course she had
not the face to appear at the theatre any more, but she kept herself by
taking in washing and sewing--

Mrs. Holt: And then she tried to set up a dancing school.

Mrs. Rummel: Naturally that was no good. What parents would trust their
children to such a woman? But it did not last very long. The fine madam
was not accustomed to work; she got something wrong with her lungs and
died of it.

Mrs. Lynge: What a horrible scandal!

Mrs. Rummel:  Yes, you can imagine how hard it was upon the Bernicks.
It is the dark spot among the sunshine of their good fortune, as Rummel
once put it. So never speak about it in this house, Mrs. Lynge.

Mrs. Holt:  And for heaven's sake never mention the stepsister, either!

Mrs. Lynge:  Oh, so Mrs. Bernick has a step-sister, too?

Mrs. Rummel:  Had, luckily-- for the relationship between them is all
over now. She was an extraordinary person too! Would you believe it,
she cut her hair short, and used to go about in men's boots in bad
weather!

Mrs. Holt:  And when her step-brother, the black sheep, had gone away,
and the whole town naturally was talking about him--what do you think
she did? She went out to America to him!

Mr. Rummel:  Yes, but remember the scandal she caused before she went,
Mrs. Holt.

Mrs. Holt:  Hush, don't speak of it.

Mrs. Lynge: My goodness, did she create a scandal too?

Mrs. Rummel: I think you ought to hear it, Mrs. Lynge. Mr. Bernick had
just got engaged to Betty Tonnesen, and the two of them went arm in arm
into her aunt's room to tell her the news--

Mrs. Holt: The Tonnesens' parents were dead, you know--

Mrs. Rummel:  When, suddenly, up got Lona Hessel from her chair and
gave our refined and well-bred Karsten Bernick such a box on the ear
that his head swam.

Mrs. Lynge:  Well, I am sure I never--

Mrs. Holt: It is absolutely true.

Mrs. Rummel: And then she packed her box and went away to America.

Mrs. Lynge: I suppose she had had her eye on him for herself.

Mrs. Rummel:  Of course she had. She imagined that he and she would
make a match of it when he came back from Paris.

Mrs. Holt:  The idea of her thinking such a thing!  Karsten Bernick--a
man of the world and the pink of courtesy, a perfect gentleman, the
darling of all the ladies...

Mrs. Rummel:  And, with it all, such an excellent young man, Mrs.
Holt--so moral.

Mrs. Lynge:  But what has this Miss Hessel made of herself in America?

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, you see, over that (as my husband once put it) has
been drawn a veil which one should hesitate to lift.

Mrs. Lynge:  What do you mean?

Mrs. Rummel: She no longer has any connection with the family, as you
may suppose; but this much the whole town knows, that she has sung for
money in drinking saloons over there--

Mrs. Holt:  And has given lectures in public--

Mrs. Rummel:  And has published some mad kind of book.

Mrs. Lynge:  You don't say so!

Mrs. Rummel:  Yes, it is true enough that Lona Hessel is one of the
spots on the sun of the Bernick family's good fortune. Well, now you
know the whole story, Mrs. Lynge. I am sure I would never have spoken
about it except to put you on your guard.

Mrs. Lynge:  Oh, you may be sure I shall be most careful. But that poor
child Dina Dorf! I am truly sorry for her.

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, really it was a stroke of good luck for her. Think
what it would have meant if she had been brought up by such parents! Of
course we did our best for her, every one of us, and gave her all the
good advice we could. Eventually Miss Bernick got her taken into this
house.

Mrs. Holt:  But she has always been a difficult child to deal with. It
is only natural--with all the bad examples she had had before her. A
girl of that sort is not like one of our own; one must be lenient with
her.

Mrs. Rummel:  Hush--here she comes. (In a louder voice.) Yes, Dina is
really a clever girl. Oh, is that you, Dina? We are just putting away
the things.

Mrs. Holt:  How delicious your coffee smells, my dear Dina. A nice cup
of coffee like that--

Mrs. Bernick (calling in from the verandah):  Will you come out here?
(Meanwhile MARTHA and DINA have helped the Maid to bring out the
coffee. All the ladies seat themselves on the verandah, and talk with a
great show of kindness to DINA. In a few moments DINA comes back into
the room and looks for her sewing.)

Mrs. Bernick (from the coffee table): Dina, won't you--?

Dina:  No, thank you. (Sits down to her sewing. MRS. BERNICK and
RORLUND exchange a few words; a moment afterwards he comes back into
the room, makes a pretext for going up to the table, and begins
speaking to DINA in low tones.)

Rorlund: Dina.

Dina:  Yes?

Rorlund:  Why don't you want to sit with the others?
