betrayed myself in some way or other. She must have noticed how happy I
began to feel from the day you came to us.

Rebecca. Yes; but dear, even if that were so--

Rosmer. You may be sure she did not fail to notice that we read the
same books; that we sought one another's company, and discussed every
new topic together. But I cannot understand it--because I was always so
careful to spare her. When I look back, it seems to me that I did
everything I could to keep her apart from our lives. Or did I not,
Rebecca?

Rebecca. Yes, yes--undoubtedly you did.

Rosmer. And so did you, too. And notwithstanding that--! Oh, it is
horrible to think of! To think that here she was--with her affection
all distorted by illness--never saying a word--watching us--noticing
everything and--and--misconstruing everything.

Rebecca (wringing her hands). Oh, I never ought to have come to
Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Just think what she must have suffered in silence! Think of all
the horrible things her poor diseased brain must have led her to
believe about us and store up in her mind about us! Did she never speak
to you of anything that could give you any kind of clue?

Rebecca (as if startled). To me! Do you suppose I should have remained
here a day longer, if she had?

Rosmer. No, no--that is obvious. What a fight she must have fought--and
fought alone, Rebecca! In despair, and all alone. And then, in the end,
the poignant misery of her victory--which was also her accusation of
us--in the mill-race! (Throws himself into a chair, rests his elbows on
the table, and hides his face in his hands.)

Rebecca (coming quietly up behind him). Listen to me, John. If it were
in your power to call Beata back--to you--to Rosmersholm--would you do
it?

Rosmer. How can I tell what I would do or what I would not do! I have
no thoughts for anything but the one thing which is irrevocable.

Rebecca. You ought to be beginning to live now, John. You were
beginning. You had freed yourself completely on all sides. You were
feeling so happy and so light-hearted

Rosmer. I know--that is true enough. And then comes this overwhelming
blow.

Rebecca (standing behind him, with her arms on the back of his chair).
How beautiful it was when we used to sit there downstairs in the
dusk--and helped each other to plan our lives out afresh. You wanted to
catch hold of actual life--the actual life of the day, as you used to
say. You wanted to pass from house to house like a guest who brought
emancipation with him--to win over men's thoughts and wills to your
own--to fashion noble men all around you, in a wider and wider
circle--noble men!

Rosmer. Noble men and happy men.

Rebecca. Yes, happy men.

Rosmer. Because it is happiness that gives the soul nobility, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Do you not think suffering too? The deepest suffering?

Rosmer. Yes, if one can win through it--conquer it--conquer it
completely.

Rebecca. That is what you must do.

Rosmer (shaking his head sadly). I shall never conquer this completely.
There will always be a doubt confronting me--a question. I shall never
again be able to lose myself in the enjoyment of what makes life so
wonderfully beautiful.

Rebecca (speaking over the back of his chair, softly). What do you
mean, John?

Rosmer (looking up at her). Calm and happy innocence.

Rebecca (taking a step backwards). Of course. Innocence. (A short
silence.)

Rosmer (resting his head on his hands with his elbows on the table, and
looking straight in front of him). How ingeniously--how
systematically--she must have put one thing together with another!
First of all she begins to have a suspicion as to my orthodoxy. How on
earth did she get that idea in her mind? Any way, she did; and the idea
grew into a certainty. And then--then, of course, it was easy for her
to think everything else possible. (Sits up in his chair and, runs his
hands through his hair.) The wild fancies I am haunted with! I shall
never get quit of them. I am certain of that--certain. They will always
be starting up before me to remind me of the dead.

Rebecca. Like the White Horse of Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Yes, like that. Rushing at me out of the dark--out of the
silence.

Rebecca. And, because of this morbid fancy of yours, you are going to
give up the hold you had just gained upon real life?

Rosmer. You are right, it seems hard--hard, Rebecca. But I have no
power of choice in the matter. How do you think I could ever get the
mastery over it?

Rebecca (standing behind his chair). By making new ties for yourself.

Rosmer (starts, and looks up). New ties?

Rebecca. Yes, new ties with the outside world. Live, work, do
something! Do not sit here musing and brooding over insoluble
conundrums.

Rosmer (getting up). New ties! (Walks across the room, turns at the
door and comes back again.) A question occurs to my mind. Has it not
occurred to you too, Rebecca?

Rebecca (catching her breath). Let me hear what it is.

Rosmer. What do you suppose will become of the tie between us, after
to-day?

Rebecca. I think surely our friendship can endure, come what may.
