certain difficulties, the outcome of narrow and selfish considerations.

Voices: Hear, hear!

Rorlund: For the fact has come to light that certain individuals, who
do not belong to our community, have stolen a march upon the
hard-working citizens of this place, and have laid hands on certain
sources of profit which by rights should have fallen to the share of
our town.

Voices: That's right! Hear, hear!

Rorlund: This regrettable fact has naturally come to your knowledge
also, Mr. Bernick. But it has not had the slightest effect in deterring
you from proceeding steadily with your project, well knowing that a
patriotic man should not solely take local interests into consideration.

Voices: Oh!--No, no!--Yes, yes!

Rorlund: It is to such a man--to the patriot citizen, whose character
we all should emulate--that we bring our homage this evening. May your
undertaking grow to be a real and lasting source of good fortune to
this community! It is true enough that a railway may be the means of
our exposing ourselves to the incursion of pernicious influences from
without; but it gives us also the means of quickly expelling them from
within. For even we, at the present time, cannot boast of being
entirely free from the danger of such outside influences; but as we
have, on this very evening--if rumour is to be believed--fortunately
got rid of certain elements of that nature, sooner than was to be
expected--

Voices: Order, order!

Rorlund:--I regard the occurrence as a happy omen for our undertaking.
My alluding to such a thing at such a moment only emphasises the fact
that the house in which we are now standing is one where the claims of
morality are esteemed even above ties of family.

Voices: Hear, hear! Bravo!

Bernick (at the same moment): Allow me--

Rorlund: I have only a few more words to say, Mr. Bernick. What you
have done for your native place we all know has not been done with any
underlying idea of its bringing tangible profit to yourself. But,
nevertheless, you must not refuse to accept a slight token of grateful
appreciation at the hands of your fellow-citizens--least of all at this
important moment when, according to the assurances of practical men, we
are standing on the threshold of a new era.

Voices: Bravo! Hear, hear!

(RORLUND signs to the servants, who bring forward the basket. During
the following speech, members of the Committee take out and present the
various objects mentioned.)

Rorlund: And so, Mr. Bernick, we have the pleasure of presenting you
with this silver coffee-service. Let it grace your board when in the
future, as so often in the past, we have the happiness of being
assembled under your hospitable roof. You, too, gentlemen, who have so
generously seconded the leader of our community, we ask to accept a
small souvenir. This silver goblet is for you, Mr. Rummel. Many a time
have you, amidst the clink of glasses, defended the interests of your
fellow-citizens in well-chosen words; may you often find similar worthy
opportunities to raise and empty this goblet in some patriotic toast!
To you, Mr. Sandstad, I present this album containing photographs of
your fellow-citizens. Your well-known and conspicuous liberality has
put you in the pleasant position of being able to number your friends
amongst all classes of society. And to you, Mr. Vigeland, I have to
offer this book of Family Devotions, printed on vellum and handsomely
bound, to grace your study table. The mellowing influence of time has
led you to take an earnest view of life; your zeal in carrying out your
daily duties has, for a long period of years, been purified and enobled
by thoughts of higher and holier things. (Turns to the crowd.) And now,
friends, three cheers for Mr. Bernick and his fellow-workers! Three
cheers for the Pillars of our Society!

The whole crowd: Bernick! Pillars of Society! Hurrah-hurrah-hurrah!

Lona: I congratulate you, brother-in-law.

(An expectant hush follows.)

Bernick (speaking seriously and slowly): Fellow citizens--your
spokesman said just now that tonight we are standing on the threshold
of a new era. I hope that will prove to be the case. But before that
can come to pass, we must lay fast hold of truth--truth which, till
tonight, has been altogether and in all circumstances a stranger to
this community of ours. (Astonishment among the audience.) To that end,
I must begin by deprecating the praises with which you, Mr. Rorlund,
according to custom on such occasions, have overwhelmed me. I do not
deserve them; because, until today, my actions have by no means been
disinterested. Even though I may not always have aimed at pecuniary
profit, I at all events recognise now that a craving for power,
influence and position has been the moving spirit of most of my actions.

Rummel (half aloud): What next!

Bernick: Standing before my fellow citizens, I do not reproach myself
for that; because I still think I am entitled to a place in the front
rank of our capable men of affairs.

Voices: Yes, yes, yes!
