any way you please. When the time comes, I shall be able to--. (Shuts
the door.) Ah, you are here. Look here, Martha--I think you had better
change your dress; and tell Betty to do the same. I don't want anything
elaborate, of course--something homely, but neat. But you must make
haste.

Lona: And a bright, cheerful face, Martha; your eyes must look happy.

Bernick: Olaf is to come downstairs too; I will have him beside me.

Lona: Hm! Olaf.

Martha: I will give Betty your message. (Goes out by the farther door
on the left.)

Lona: Well, the great and solemn moment is at hand.

Bernick (walking uneasily up and down): Yes, it is.

Lona: At such a moment I should think a man would feel proud and happy.

Bernick (looking at her): Hm!

Lona: I hear the whole town is to be illuminated.

Bernick: Yes, they have some idea of that sort.

Lona: All the different clubs will assemble with their banners--your
name will blaze out in letters of fire--tonight the telegraph will
flash the news to every part of the country: "In the bosom of his happy
family, Mr. Bernick received the homage of his fellow citizens, as one
of the pillars of society."

Bernick: That is so; and they will begin to cheer outside, and the
crowd will shout in front of my house until I shall be obliged to go
out and bow to them and thank them.

Lona: Obliged to?

Bernick. Do you suppose I shall feel happy at that moment?

Lona: No, I don't suppose you will feel so very happy.

Bernick: Lona, you despise me.

Lona: Not yet.

Bernick: And you have no right to; no right to despise me! Lona, you
can have no idea how utterly alone I stand in this cramped and stunted
community--where I have had, year after year, to stifle my ambition for
a fuller life. My work may seem many-sided, but what have I really
accomplished? Odds and ends--scraps. They would not stand anything else
here. If I were to go a step in advance of the opinions and views that
are current at the moment, I should lose all my influence. Do you know
what we are--we who are looked upon as pillars of society? We are
nothing more, nor less, than the tools of society.

Lona: Why have you only begun to realise that now?

Bernick: Because I have been thinking a great deal lately--since you
came back--and this evening I have thought more seriously than ever
before. Oh, Lona, why did not I really know you then--in the old days,
I mean?

Lona: And if you had?

Bernick: I should never have let you go; and, if I had had you, I
should not be in the position I am in tonight.

Lona: And do you never consider what she might have been to you--she
whom you chose in my place?

Bernick: I know, at all events, that she has been nothing to me of what
I needed.

Lona: Because you have never shared your interests with her; because
you have never allowed her full and frank exchange of thoughts with
you; because you have allowed her to be borne under by self-reproach
for the shame you cast upon one who was dear to her.

Bernick: Yes, yes; it all comes from lying and deceit.

Lona: Then why not break with all this lying and deceit?

Bernick: Now? It is too late now, Lona.

Lona: Karsten, tell me--what gratification does all this show and
deception bring you?

Bernick: It brings me none. I must disappear someday, and all this
community of bunglers with me. But a generation is growing up that will
follow us; it is my son that I work for--I am providing a career for
him. There will come a time when truth will enter into the life of the
community, and on that foundation he shall build up a happier existence
than his father.

Lona: With a lie at the bottom of it all? Consider what sort of an
inheritance it is that you are leaving to your son.

Bernick (in tones of suppressed despair): It is a thousand times worse
than you think. But surely some day the curse must be lifted; and
yet--nevertheless--. (Vehemently.) How could I bring all this upon my
own head! Still, it is done now; I must go on with it now. You shall
not succeed in crushing me! (HILMAR comes in hurriedly and agitatedly
from the right, with an open letter in his hand.)

Hilmar: But this is--Betty, Betty.

Bernick: What is the matter? Are they coming already?

Hilmar: No, no--but I must speak to some one immediately. (Goes out
through the farther door on the left.)

Lona: Karsten, you talk about our having come here to crush you. So let
me tell you what sort of stuff this prodigal son, whom your moral
community shuns as if he had the plague, is made of. He can do without
any of you--for he is away now.

Bernick: But he said he meant to come back

Lona: Johan will never come back. He is gone for good, and Dina with
him.

Bernick: Never come back?--and Dina with him?

Lona: Yes, to be his wife. That is how these two strike your virtuous
community in the face, just as I did once--but never mind that.

Bernick: Gone--and she too--in the "Indian Girl"--

Lona: No; he would not trust so precious a freight to that rascally
crew. Johan and Dina are on the "Palm Tree."

Bernick: Ah! Then it is all in vain-- (Goes hurriedly to the door of
