
Dina:  When I came in with the coffee, I could see from the strange
lady's face that they had been talking about me.

Rorlund:  But did you not see as well how agreeable she was to you out
there?

Dina:  That is just what I will not stand

Rorlund:  You are very self-willed, Dina.

Dina:  Yes.

Rorlund:  But why?

Dina:  Because it is my nature.

Rorlund:  Could you not try to alter your nature?

Dina:  No.

Rorlund:  Why not?

Dina (looking at him): Because I am one of the "poor fallen creatures",
you know.

Rorlund:  For shame, Dina.

Dina:  So was my mother.

Rorlund:  Who has spoken to you about such things?

Dina:  No one; they never do. Why don't they? They all handle me in
such a gingerly fashion, as if they thought I should go to pieces if
they---. Oh, how I hate all this kind-heartedness.

Rorlund:  My dear Dina, I can quite understand that you feel repressed
here, but--

Dina:  Yes; if only I could get right away from here. I could make my
own way quite well, if only I did not live amongst people who are
so--so--

Rorlund:  So what?

Dina:  So proper and so moral.

Rorlund:  Oh but, Dina, you don't mean that.

Dina:  You know quite well in what sense I mean it. Hilda and Netta
come here every day, to be exhibited to me as good examples. I can
never be so beautifully behaved as they; I don't want to be. If only I
were right away from it all, I should grow to be worth something.

Rorlund:  But you are worth a great deal, Dina dear.

Dina:  What good does that do me here?

Rorlund:  Get right away, you say? Do you mean it seriously?

Dina:  I would not stay here a day longer, if it were not for you.

Rorlund: Tell me, Dina--why is it that you are fond of being with me?

Dina:  Because you teach me so much that is beautiful.

Rorlund:  Beautiful? Do you call the little I can teach you, beautiful?

Dina: Yes. Or perhaps, to be accurate, it is not that you teach me
anything; but when I listen to you talking I see beautiful visions.

Rorlund: What do you mean exactly when you call a thing beautiful?

Dina: I have never thought it out.

Rorlund: Think it out now, then. What do you understand by a beautiful
thing?

Dina: A beautiful thing is something that is great--and far off.

Rorlund: Hm!--Dina, I am so deeply concerned about you, my dear.

Dina: Only that?

Rorlund: You know perfectly well that you are dearer to me than I can
say.

Dina: If I were Hilda or Netta, you would not be afraid to let people
see it.

Rorlund: Ah, Dina, you can have no idea of the number of things I am
forced to take into consideration. When it is a man's lot to be a moral
pillar of the community he lives in, he cannot be too circumspect. If
only I could be certain that people would interpret my motives
properly. But no matter for that; you must, and shall be, helped to
raise yourself. Dina, is it a bargain between us that when I come--when
circumstances allow me to come--to you and say: "Here is my hand," you
will take it and be my wife? Will you promise me that, Dina?

Dina: Yes.

Rorlund: Thank you, thank you! Because for my part, too--oh, Dina, I
love you so dearly. Hush! Some one is coming. Dina--for my sake--go out
to the others.(She goes out to the coffee table. At the same moment
RUMMEL, SANDSTAD and VIGELAND come out of BERNICK'S room, followed by
Bernick, who has a bundle of papers in his hand.)

Bernick: Well, then, the matter is settled.

Vigeland: Yes, I hope to goodness it is.

Rummel: It is settled, Bernick. A Norseman's word stands as firm as the
rocks on Dovrefjeld, you know!

Bernick: And no one must falter, no one give way, no matter what
opposition we meet with.

Rummel: We will stand or fall together, Bernick.

Hilmar (coming in from the verandah): Fall? If I may ask, isn't it the
railway scheme that is going to fall?

Bernick: No, on the contrary, it is going to proceed--

Rummel: Full steam, Mr. Tonnesen.

Hilmar (coming nearer): Really?

Rorlund: How is that?

Mrs. Bernick (at the verandah door): Karsten, dear, what is it that--?

Bernick:  My dear Betty, how can it interest you? (To the three men.)
We must get out lists of subscribers, and the sooner the better.
Obviously our four names must head the list. The positions we occupy in
the community makes it our duty to make ourselves as prominent as
possible in the affair.

Sandstad: Obviously, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: The thing shall go through, Bernick; I swear it shall!

Bernick: Oh, I have not the least anticipation of failure. We must see
that we work, each one among the circle of his own acquaintances; and
if we can point to the fact that the scheme is exciting a lively
interest in all ranks of society, then it stands to reason that our
Municipal Corporation will have to contribute its share.

Mrs. Bernick: Karsten, you really must come out here and tell us--

Bernick: My dear Betty, it is an affair that does not concern ladies at
all.

Hilmar: Then you are really going to support this railway scheme after
all?

Bernick: Yes, naturally.

Rorlund: But last year, Mr. Bernick--
