were people who went to Court!" (Laughs.) Bless my soul, she never
could forget that Captain Alving got a Court appointment while she was
in service here.

Regina. Poor mother--you worried her into her grave pretty soon.

Engstrand (shrugging his shoulders). Of course, of course; I have got
to take the blame for everything.

Regina (beneath her breath, as she turns away). Ugh--that leg, too!

Engstrand. What are you saying, my girl?

Regina. Pied de mouton.

Engstrand. Is that English?

Regina. Yes.

Engstrand. You have had a good education out here, and no mistake; and
it may stand you in good stead now, Regina.

Regina (after a short silence). And what was it you wanted me to come
to town for?

Engstrand. Need you ask why a father wants his only child? Ain't I a
poor lonely widower?

Regina. Oh, don't come to me with that tale. Why do you want me to go?

Engstrand. Well, I must tell you I am thinking of taking up a new line
now.

Regina (whistles). You have tried that so often--but it has always
proved a fool's errand.

Engstrand. Ah, but this time you will just see, Regina! Strike me dead
if--

Regina (stamping her foot). Stop swearing!

Engstrand. Sh! Sh!--you're quite right, my girl, quite right! What I
wanted to say was only this, that I have put by a tidy penny out of
what I have made by working at this new Orphanage up here.

Regina. Have you? All the better for you.

Engstrand. What is there for a man to spend his money on, out here in
the country?

Regina. Well, what then?

Engstrand. Well, you see, I thought of putting the money into something
that would pay. I thought of some kind of an eating-house for seafaring
folk--

Regina. Heavens!

Engstrand. Oh, a high-class eating-house, of course--not a pigsty for
common sailors. Damn it, no; it would be a place ships' captains and
first mates would come to; really good sort of people, you know.

Regina. And what should I--?

Engstrand. You would help there: But only to make show, you know. You
wouldn't find it hard work, I can promise you, my girl. You should do
exactly as you liked.

Regina. Oh, yes, quite so!

Engstrand. But we must have some women in the house; that is as clear
as daylight. Because in the evening we must make the place a little
attractive--some singing and dancing, and that sort of thing. Remember
they are seafolk--wayfarers on the waters of life! (Coming nearer to
her.) Now don't be a fool and stand in your own way, Regina. What good
are you going to do here? Will this education, that your mistress has
paid for, be of any use? You are to look after the children in the new
Home, I hear. Is that the sort of work for you? Are you so frightfully
anxious to go and wear out your health and strength for the sake of
these dirty brats?

Regina. No, if things were to go as I want them to, then--. Well, it
may happen; who knows? It may happen!

Engstrand. What may happen?

Regina. Never you mind. Is it much that you have put by, up here?

Engstrand. Taking it all round, I should say about forty or fifty
pounds.

Regina. That's not so bad.

Engstrand. It's enough to make a start with, my girl.

Regina. Don't you mean to give me any of the money?

Engstrand. No, I'm hanged if I do.

Regina. Don't you mean to send me as much as a dress-length of stuff,
just for once?

Engstrand. Come and live in the town with me and you shall have plenty
of dresses.

Regina: Pooh!--I can get that much for myself, if I have a mind to.

Engstrand. But it's far better to have a father's guiding hand, Regina.
Just now I can get a nice house in Little Harbour Street. They don't
want much money down for it--and we could make it like a sort of
seamen's home, don't you know.

Regina. But I have no intention of living with you! I'll have nothing
whatever to do with you: So now, be off!

Engstrand. You wouldn't be living with me long, my girl. No such
luck--not if you knew how to play your cards. Such a fine wench as you
have grown this last year or two...

Regina. Well--?

Engstrand. It wouldn't be very long before some first mate came
along--or perhaps a captain.

Regina. I don't mean to marry a man of that sort. Sailors have no
savoir-vivre.

Engstrand. What haven't they got?

Regina. I know what sailors are, I tell you. They aren't the sort of
people to marry.

Engstrand. Well, don't bother about marrying them. You can make it pay
just as well. (More confidentially.) That fellow--the Englishman--the
one with the yacht--he gave seventy pounds, he did; and she wasn't a
bit prettier than you.

Regina (advancing towards him). Get out!

Engstrand (stepping back). Here! here!--you're not going to hit me, I
suppose?

Regina. Yes! If you talk like that of mother, I will hit you. Get out,
I tell. You! (Pushes him up to the garden door.) And don't bang the
doors. Young Mr. Alving--

Engstrand. Is asleep--I know. It's funny how anxious you are about
young Mr. Alving. (In a lower tone.) Oho! is it possible that it is he
that--?

Regina. Get out, and be quick about it! Your wits are wandering, my
