our duty, Mrs. Alving. And your duty was to cleave to the man you had
chosen and to whom you were bound by a sacred bond.

Mrs. Alving. You know quite well what sort of a life my husband was
living at that time--what excesses he was guilty of.

Menders. I know only too well what rumour used to say of him; and I
should be the last person to approve of his conduct as a young man,
supposing that rumour spoke the truth. But it is not a wife's part to
be her husband's judge. You should have considered it your bounden duty
humbly to have borne the cross that a higher will had laid upon you.
But, instead of that, you rebelliously cast off your cross, you
deserted the man whose stumbling footsteps you should have supported,
you did what was bound to imperil your good name and reputation, and
came very near to imperilling the reputation of others into the bargain.

Mrs. Alving. Of others? Of one other, you mean.

Manders. It was the height of imprudence, your seeking refuge with me.

Mrs. Alving. With our priest? With our intimate friend?

Manders. All the more on that account; you should thank God that I
possessed the necessary strength of mind--that I was able to turn you
from your outrageous intention, and that it was vouchsafed to me to
succeed in leading you back into the path of duty, and back to your
lawful husband.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, Mr. Manders, that certainly was your doing.

Manders. I was but the humble instrument of a higher power. And is it
not true that my having been able to bring you again under the yoke of
duty and obedience sowed the seeds of a rich blessing on all the rest
of your life? Did things not turn out as I foretold to you? Did not
your husband turn from straying in the wrong path, as a man should? Did
he not, after that, live a life of love and good report with you all
his days? Did he not become a benefactor to the neighbourhood? Did he
not so raise you up to his level, so that by degree you became his
fellow-worker in all his undertakings--and a noble fellow-worker, too.
I know, Mrs. Alving; that praise I will give you. But now I come to the
second serious false step in your life.

Mrs. Alving. What do you mean?

Manders, Just as once you forsook your duty as a wife, so, since then,
you have forsaken your duty as a mother.

Mrs. Alving. Oh--!

Manders. You have been overmastered all your life by a disastrous
spirit of willfulness. All your impulses have led you towards what is
undisciplined and lawless. You have never been willing to submit to any
restraint.  Anything in life that has seemed irksome to you, you have
thrown aside recklessly and unscrupulously, as if it were a burden that
you were free to rid yourself of if you would. It did not please you to
be a wife any longer, and so you left your husband. Your duties as a
mother were irksome to you, so you sent your child away among strangers.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, that is true; I did that.

Menders. And that is why you have become a stranger to him.

Mrs. Alving. No, no, I am not that!

Manders. You are; you must be. And what sort of a son is it that you
have got back? Think over it seriously, Mrs. Alving. You erred
grievously in your husband's case--you acknowledge as much, by erecting
this memorial to him. Now you are bound to acknowledge how much you
have erred in your son's case; possibly there may still be time to
reclaim him from the path of wickedness. Turn over a new leaf, and set
yourself to reform what there may still be that is capable of
reformation in him. Because (with uplifted forefinger) in very truth,
Mrs. Alving, you are a guilty mother!--That is what I have thought it
my duty to say to you.

(A short silence.)

Mrs. Alving (speaking slowly and with self-control). You have had your
say, Mr. Manders, and tomorrow you will be making a public speech in
memory of my husband. I shall not speak tomorrow. But now I wish to
speak to you for a little, just as you have been speaking to me.

Manders. By all means; no doubt you wish to bring forward some excuses
for your behaviour.

Mrs. Alving. No. I only want to tell you something--

Manders. Well?

Mrs. Alving. In all that you said just now about me and my husband, and
about our life together after you had, as you put it, led me back into
the path of duty--there was nothing that you knew at first hand. From
that moment you never again set foot in our house--you, who had been
our daily companion before that.

Manders. Remember that you and your husband moved out of town
immediately afterwards.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, and you never once came out here to see us in my
husband's lifetime. It was only the business in connection with the
Orphanage that obliged you to come and see me.

Manders (in a low and uncertain voice). Helen--if that is a reproach, I
can only beg you to consider--

Mrs. Alving. --the respect you owed by your calling?--yes. All the more
as I was a wife who had tried to run away from her husband. One can
never be too careful to have nothing to do with such reckless women.
