
Rosmer. Good-morning, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Good-morning, dear. (She goes on working for a little while in
silence.) Are you going out?

Rosmer. Yes.

Rebecca. It is such a lovely day.

Rosmer. You did not come up to see me this morning.

Rebecca. No--I didn't. Not to-day.

Rosmer. Don't you mean to do so in future, either? Rebecca. I cannot
say yet, dear.

Rosmer. Has anything come for me?

Rebecca. The "County News" has come.

Rosmer. The "County News"!

Rebecca. There it is, on the table.

Rosmer (putting down his hat and stick). Is there anything--?

Rebecca. Yes.

Rosmer. And you did not send it up to me

Rebecca. You will read it quite soon enough.

Rosmer. Well, let us see. (Takes up the paper and stands by the table
reading it.) What!--"cannot pronounce too emphatic a warning against
unprincipled deserters." (Looks at her.) They call me a deserter,
Rebecca.

Rebecca. They mention no names at all.

Rosmer. It comes to the same thing. (Goes on reading.) "Secret traitors
to the good cause."--"Judas-like creatures, who shamelessly confess
their apostasy as soon as they think the most opportune and most
profitable moment has arrived."--"A reckless outrage on the fair fame
of honoured ancestors"--"in the expectation that those who are enjoying
a brief spell of authority will not disappoint them of a suitable
reward." (Lays the paper down on the table.) And they write that of
me--these men who have known me so long and so intimately--write a
thing that they do not even believe themselves! They know there is not
a single word of truth in it--and yet they write it.

Rebecca. There is more of it yet.

Rosmer (taking up the paper again). "Make some allowance for
inexperience and want of judgment"--"a pernicious influence which, very
possibly, has extended even to matters which for the present we will
refrain from publicly discussing or condemning." (Looks at her.) What
does that mean?

Rebecca. That is a hit at me, obviously.

Rosmer (laying down the paper). Rebecca, this is the conduct of
dishonourable men.

Rebecca. Yes, it seems to me they have no right to talk about
Mortensgaard.

Rosmer (walking up and down the room). They must be saved from this
sort of thing. All the good that is in men is destroyed, if it is
allowed to go on. But it shall not be so! How happy--how happy I should
feel if I could succeed in bringing a little light into all this murky
ugliness.

Rebecca (getting up). I am sure of it. There is something great,
something splendid, for you to live for!

Rosmer. Just think of it--if I could wake them to a real knowledge of
themselves--bring them to be angry with and ashamed of
themselves--induce them to be at one with each other in toleration, in
love, Rebecca!

Rebecca. Yes! Give yourself up entirely to that task, and you will see
that you will succeed.

Rosmer. I think it might be done. What happiness it would be to live
one's life, then! No more hateful strife--only emulation; every eye
fixed on the same goal; every man's will, every man's thoughts moving
forward-upward--each in its own inevitable path Happiness for all--and
through the efforts of all! (Looks out of the window as he speaks, then
gives a start and says gloomily:) Ah! not through me.

Rebecca. Not--not through you?

Rosmer. Nor for me, either.

Rebecca. Oh, John, have no such doubts.

Rosmer. Happiness, dear Rebecca, means first and foremost the calm,
joyous sense of innocence.

Rebecca (staring in front of her). Ah, innocence--

Rosmer. You need fear nothing on that score. But I--

Rebecca. You least of all men!

Rosmer (pointing out of the window). The mill-race.

Rebecca. Oh, John!--(MRS. HELSETH looks in in through the door on the
left.)

Mrs. Helseth. Miss West!

Rebecca. Presently, presently. Not now.

Mrs. Helseth. Just a word, miss! (REBECCA goes to the door. MRS.
HELSETH tells her something, and they whisper together for a moment;
then MRS. HELSETH nods and goes away.)

Rosmer (uneasily). Was it anything for me?

Rebecca. No, only something about the housekeeping. You ought to go out
into the open air now, John dear. You should go for a good long walk.

Rosmer (taking up his hat). Yes, come along; we will go together.

Rebecca. No, dear, I can't just now. You must go by yourself. But shake
off all these gloomy thoughts--promise me that!

Rosmer. I shall never be able to shake them quite off, I am afraid.

Rebecca. Oh, but how can you let such groundless fancies take such a
hold on you!

Rosmer. Unfortunately they are not so groundless as you think, dear. I
have lain, thinking them over, all night. Perhaps Beata saw things
truly after all.

Rebecca. In what way do you mean?

Rosmer. Saw things truly when she believed I loved you, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Truly in THAT respect?

Rosmer (laying his hat down on the table). This is the question I have
been wrestling with--whether we two have deluded ourselves the whole
time, when we have been calling the tie between us merely friendship.

Rebecca. Do you mean, then, that the right name for it would have
