to worry me! And then the young scamp has the audacity to threaten that
he will run away! Just let him try it!--You? No, very likely; you don't
trouble yourself much about what happens to him. I really believe that
if he were to get killed--! Oh, really? Well, I have work to leave
behind me in the world; I have no fancy for being left childless--Now,
do not raise objections, Betty; it shall be as I say--he is confined to
the house. (Listens.) Hush; do not let any one notice anything. (KRAP
comes in from the right.)

Krap: Can you spare me a moment, Mr. Bernick?

Bernick (throwing away the cane): Certainly, certainly. Have you come
from the yard?

Krap: Yes. Ahem--!

Bernick: Well? Nothing wrong with the "Palm Tree," I hope?

Krap: The "Palm Tree" can sail tomorrow, but

Bernick: It is the "Indian Girl," then? I had a suspicion that that
obstinate fellow--

Krap: The "Indian Girl" can sail tomorrow, too; but I am sure she will
not get very far.

Bernick: What do you mean?

Krap: Excuse me, sir; that door is standing ajar, and I think there is
some one in the other room--

Bernick (shutting the door): There, then! But what is this that no one
else must hear?

Krap: Just this--that I believe Aune intends to let the "Indian Girl"
go to the bottom with every mother's son on board.

Bernick: Good God!--what makes you think that?

Krap: I cannot account for it any other way, sir.

Bernick: Well, tell me as briefly as you can

Krap: I will. You know yourself how slowly the work has gone on in the
yard since we got the new machines and the new inexperienced hands?

Bernick: Yes, yes.

Krap: But this morning, when I went down there, I noticed that the
repairs to the American boat had made extraordinary progress; the great
hole in the bottom--the rotten patch, you know--

Bernick: Yes, yes--what about it?

Krap: Was completely repaired--to all appearance at any rate, covered
up--looked as good as new. I heard that Aune himself had been working
at it by lantern light the whole night.

Bernick: Yes, yes--well?

Krap: I turned it over in my head for a bit; the hands were away at
their breakfast, so I found an opportunity to have a look around the
boat, both outside and in, without anyone seeing me. I had a job to get
down to the bottom through the cargo, but I learned the truth. There is
something very suspicious going on, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: I cannot believe it, Krap. I cannot and will not believe such
a thing of Aune.

Krap: I am very sorry--but it is the simple truth. Something very
suspicious is going on. No new timbers put in, as far as I could see,
only stopped up and tinkered at, and covered over with sailcloth and
tarpaulins and that sort of thing--an absolute fraud. The "Indian Girl"
will never get to New York; she will go to the bottom like a cracked
pot.

Bernick: This is most horrible! But what can be his object, do you
suppose?

Krap: Probably he wants to bring the machines into discredit--wants to
take his revenge--wants to force you to take the old hands on again.

Bernick: And to do this he is willing to sacrifice the lives of all on
board.

Krap: He said the other day that there were no men on board the "Indian
Girl"--only wild beasts.

Bernick: Yes, but--apart from that--has he no regard for the great loss
of capital it would mean?

Krap: Aune does not look upon capital with a very friendly eye, Mr.
Bernick.

Bernick: That is perfectly true; he is an agitator and a fomenter of
discontent; but such an unscrupulous thing as this--Look here, Krap;
you must look into the matter once more. Not a word of it to any one.
The blame will fall on our yard if any one hears anything of it.

Krap: Of course, but--

Bernick: When the hands are away at their dinner you must manage to get
down there again; I must have absolute certainty about it.

Krap: You shall, sir; but, excuse me, what do you propose to do?

Bernick: Report the affair, naturally. We cannot, of course, let
ourselves become accomplices in such a crime. I could not have such a
thing on my conscience. Moreover, it will make a good impression, both
on the press and on the public in general, if it is seen that I set all
personal interests aside and let justice take its course.

Krap: Quite true, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: But first of all I must be absolutely certain. And meanwhile,
do not breathe a word of it.

Krap: Not a word, sir. And you shall have your certainty. (Goes out
through the garden and down the street.)

Bernick (half aloud): Shocking!--But no, it is impossible!
Inconceivable!

(As he turns to go into his room, HILMAR comes in from the right.)

Hilmar: Good morning, Karsten. Let me congratulate you on your triumph
at the Commercial Association yesterday.

Bernick: Thank you.

Hilmar: It was a brilliant triumph, I hear; the triumph of intelligent
public spirit over selfishness and prejudice--something like a raid of
French troops on the Kabyles. It is astonishing that after that
unpleasant scene here, you could--

Bernick: Yes, yes--quite so.
