scandal-mongers should find some connection between these two rumours?
And as the woman remained here, living in poverty, people declared that
he had taken the money with him to America; and every time rumour
mentioned the sum, it grew larger.

Lona: And you, Karsten--?

Bernick: I grasped at the rumour like a drowning man at a straw.

Lona: You helped to spread it?

Bernick: I did not contradict it. Our creditors had begun to be
pressing, and I had the task of keeping them quiet. The result was the
dissipating of any suspicion as to the stability of the firm; people
said that we had been hit by a temporary piece of ill-luck--that all
that was necessary was that they should not press us--only give us time
and every creditor would be paid in full.

Lona: And every creditor was paid in full?

Bernick: Yes, Lona, that rumour saved our house and made me the man I
now am.

Lona: That is to say, a lie has made you the man you now are.

Bernick: Whom did it injure at the time? It was Johan's intention never
to come back.

Lona: You ask whom it injured. Look into your own heart, and tell me if
it has not injured you.

Bernick: Look into any man's heart you please, and you will always
find, in every one, at least one black spot which he has to keep
concealed.

Lona: And you call yourselves pillars of society!

Bernick: Society has none better.

Lona: And of what consequence is it whether such a society be propped
up or not? What does it all consist of? Show and lies--and nothing
else. Here are you, the first man in the town, living in grandeur and
luxury, powerful and respected--you, who have branded an innocent man
as a criminal.

Bernick: Do you suppose I am not deeply conscious of the wrong I have
done him? And do you suppose I am not ready to make amends to him for
it?

Lona: How? By speaking out?

Bernick: Would you have the heart to insist on that?

Lona: What else can make amends for such a wrong?

Bernick: I am rich, Lona; Johan can demand any sum he pleases.

Lona: Yes, offer him money, and you will hear what he will say.

Bernick: Do you know what he intends to do?

Lona: No; since yesterday he has been dumb. He looks as if this had
made a grown man of him all at once.

Bernick: I must talk to him.

Lona: Here he comes. (JOHAN comes in from the right.)

Bernick (going towards hint): Johan--!

Johan (motioning him away): Listen to me first. Yesterday morning I
gave you my word that I would hold my tongue.

Bernick: You did.

Johan: But then I did not know--

Bernick: Johan, only let me say a word or two to explain the
circumstances--

Johan: It is unnecessary; I understand the circumstances perfectly. The
firm was in a dangerous position at the time; I had gone off, and you
had my defenceless name and reputation at your mercy. Well, I do not
blame you so very much for what you did; we were young and thoughtless
in those days. But now I have need of the truth, and now you must speak.

Bernick: And just now I have need of all my reputation for morality,
and therefore I cannot speak.

Johan: I don't take much account of the false reports you spread about
me; it is the other thing that you must take the blame of. I shall make
Dina my wife, and here--here in your town--I mean to settle down and
live with her.

Lona: Is that what you mean to do?

Bernick: With Dina? Dina as your wife?--in this town?

Johan: Yes, here and nowhere else. I mean to stay here to defy all
these liars and slanderers. But before I can win her, you must
exonerate me.

Bernick: Have you considered that, if I confess to the one thing, it
will inevitably mean making myself responsible for the other as well?
You will say that I can show by our books that nothing dishonest
happened? But I cannot; our books were not so accurately kept in those
days. And even if I could, what good would it do? Should I not in any
case be pointed at as the man who had once saved himself by an untruth,
and for fifteen years had allowed that untruth and all its consequences
to stand without having raised a finger to demolish it? You do not know
our community very much, or you would realise that it would ruin me
utterly.

Johan: I can only tell you that I mean to make Mrs. Dorf's daughter my
wife, and live with her in this town.

Bernick (wiping the perspiration from his forehead): Listen to me,
Johan--and you too, Lona. The circumstances I am in just now are quite
exceptional. I am situated in such a way that if you aim this blow at
me you will not only destroy me, but will also destroy a great future,
rich in blessings, that lies before the community which, after all, was
the home of your childhood.

Johan: And if I do not aim this blow at you, I shall be destroying all
my future happiness with my own hand.

Lona: Go on, Karsten.

Bernick: I will tell you, then. It is mixed up with the railway
project, and the whole thing is not quite so simple as you think. I
suppose you have heard that last year there was some talk of a railway
line along the coast? Many influential people backed up the
