words, Mr. Hovstad--the Baths will become the focus of our municipal
life! Not a doubt of it!

Mrs. Stockmann. That is just what Thomas says.

Peter Stockmann. Think how extraordinarily the place has developed
within the last year or two! Money has been flowing in, and there is
some life and some business doing in the town. Houses and landed
property are rising in value every day.

Hovstad. And unemployment is diminishing,

Peter Stockmann. Yes, that is another thing. The burden on the poor
rates has been lightened, to the great relief of the propertied
classes; and that relief will be even greater if only we get a really
good summer this year, and lots of visitors--plenty of invalids, who
will make the Baths talked about.

Hovstad. And there is a good prospect of that, I hear.

Peter Stockmann. It looks very promising. Inquiries about apartments
and that sort of thing are reaching us, every day.

Hovstad. Well, the doctor's article will come in very suitably.

Peter Stockmann. Has he been writing something just lately?

Hovstad. This is something he wrote in the winter; a recommendation of
the Baths--an account of the excellent sanitary conditions here. But I
held the article over, temporarily.

Peter Stockmann. Ah,--some little difficulty about it, I suppose?

Hovstad. No, not at all; I thought it would be better to wait until the
spring, because it is just at this time that people begin to think
seriously about their summer quarters.

Peter Stockmann. Quite right; you were perfectly right, Mr. Hovstad.

Hovstad. Yes, Thomas is really indefatigable when it is a question of
the Baths.

Peter Stockmann. Well remember, he is the Medical Officer to the Baths.

Hovstad. Yes, and what is more, they owe their existence to him.

Peter Stockmann. To him? Indeed! It is true I have heard from time to
time that some people are of that opinion. At the same time I must say
I imagined that I took a modest part in the enterprise.

Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, that is what Thomas is always saying.

Hovstad. But who denies it, Mr. Stockmann? You set the thing going and
made a practical concern of it; we all know that. I only meant that the
idea of it came first from the doctor.

Peter Stockmann. Oh, ideas yes! My brother has had plenty of them in
his time--unfortunately. But when it is a question of putting an idea
into practical shape, you have to apply to a man of different mettle,
Mr. Hovstad. And I certainly should have thought that in this house at
least...

Mrs. Stockmann. My dear Peter--

Hovstad. How can you think that--?

Mrs. Stockmann. Won't you go in and have something, Mr. Hovstad? My
husband is sure to be back directly.

Hovstad. Thank you, perhaps just a morsel. (Goes into the dining-room.)

Peter Stockmann (lowering his voice a little). It is a curious thing
that these farmers' sons never seem to lose their want of tact.

Mrs. Stockmann. Surely it is not worth bothering about! Cannot you and
Thomas share the credit as brothers?

Peter Stockmann. I should have thought so; but apparently some people
are not satisfied with a share.

Mrs. Stockmann. What nonsense! You and Thomas get on so capitally
together. (Listens.) There he is at last, I think. (Goes out and opens
the door leading to the hall.)

Dr. Stockmann (laughing and talking outside). Look here--here is
another guest for you, Katherine. Isn't that jolly! Come in, Captain
Horster; hang your coat up on this peg. Ah, you don't wear an overcoat.
Just think, Katherine; I met him in the street and could hardly
persuade him to come up! (CAPTAIN HORSTER comes into the room and
greets MRS. STOCKMANN. He is followed by DR. STOCKMANN.) Come along in,
boys. They are ravenously hungry again, you know. Come along, Captain
Horster; you must have a slice of beef. (Pushes HORSTER into the
dining-room. EJLIF and MORTEN go in after them.)

Mrs. Stockmann. But, Thomas, don't you see--?

Dr. Stockmann (turning in the doorway). Oh, is it you, Peter? (Shakes
hands with him.) Now that is very delightful.

Peter Stockmann. Unfortunately I must go in a moment--

Dr. Stockmann. Rubbish! There is some toddy just coming in. You haven't
forgotten the toddy, Katherine?

Mrs. Stockmann. Of course not; the water is boiling now. (Goes into the
dining-room.)

Peter Stockmann. Toddy too!

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, sit down and we will have it comfortably.

Peter Stockmann. Thanks, I never care about an evening's drinking.

Dr. Stockmann. But this isn't an evening's drinking.

Peter Stockmann. It seems to me--. (Looks towards the dining-room.) It
is extraordinary how they can put away all that food.

Dr. Stockmann (rubbing his hands). Yes, isn't it splendid to see young
people eat? They have always got an appetite, you know! That's as it
should be. Lots of food--to build up their strength! They are the
people who are going to stir up the fermenting forces of the future,
Peter.

Peter Stockmann. May I ask what they will find here to "stir up," as
you put it?

Dr. Stockmann. Ah, you must ask the young people that--when the times
