life it was you and you alone, even then, that looked after everything
here.

Rebecca. But it was more like a kind of regency in the wife's name.

Kroll. Whatever it was, I--. I will tell you what, Miss West; as far as
I am concerned I should have nothing whatever to say against it if you.
But it doesn't do to say such things.

Rebecca. What things?

Kroll. Well, if it so happened that you were to step into the empty
place--

Rebecca. I have the place I want, already, Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. Yes, as far as material benefits go; but not--

Rebecca (interrupting him, in a serious voice). For shame, Mr. Kroll!
How can you sit there and jest about such things!

Kroll. Oh, well, I dare say our good John Rosmer thinks he has had more
than enough of married life. But, all the same--

Rebecca. Really, you almost make me feel inclined to laugh at you.

Kroll. All the same--Tell me, Miss West, if I may be allowed the
question, how old are you?

Rebecca. I am ashamed to say I was twenty-nine on my last birthday, Mr.
Kroll. I am nearly thirty.

Kroll. Quite so. And Rosmer--how old is he? Let me see. He is five
years younger than me, so he must be just about forty-three. It seems
to me it would be very suitable.

Rebecca. No doubt, no doubt. It would be remarkably suitable--Will you
stop and have supper with us?

Kroll. Thank you. I had meant to pay you a good long visit, because
there is a matter I want to talk over with our excellent friend--Well,
then, Miss West, to prevent your taking foolish ideas into your head
again, I will come out here again from time to time, as in the old days.

Rebecca. Yes, please do. (Holds out her hand to, him.) Thank you, thank
you! You are really uncommonly good-natured.

Kroll (with a little grumble). Am I? I can tell you that is more than
they say at home. (ROSMER comes in by the door on the right.)

Rebecca. Mr. Rosmer, do you see who is sitting here?

Rosmer. Mrs. Helseth told me. (KROLL gets up.) I am so glad to see you
here again, my dear fellow. (Puts his hands on KROLL'S shoulders and
looks him in the face.) Dear old friend! I knew that one day we should
be on our old footing again.

Kroll. My dear fellow, have you that insane idea in your head too, that
any thing could come between us?

Rebecca (to ROSMER). Isn't it delightful to think it was all our
imagination!

Rosmer. Is that really true, Kroll? But why have you kept so
obstinately away from us?

Kroll (seriously, and in, a subdued voice). Because I did not want to
come here like a living reminder of the unhappy time that is past--and
of her who met her death in the mill-race.

Rosmer. It was a very kind thought on your part. You are always so
considerate. But it was altogether unnecessary to keep away from us on
that account. Come along, let us sit down on the sofa. (They sit down.)
I can assure you it is not in the least painful for me to think about
Beata. We talk about her every day. She seems to us to have a part in
the house still.

Kroll. Does she really?

Rebecca (lighting the lamp). Yes, it is really quite true.

Rosmer. She really does. We both think so affectionately of her. And
both Rebecca--both Miss West and I know in our hearts that we did all
that lay in our power for the poor afflicted creature. We have nothing
to reproach ourselves with. That is why I feel there is something sweet
and peaceful in the way we can think of Beata now.

Kroll. You dear good people! In future I am coming out to see you every
day.

Rebecca (sitting down in an arm-chair). Yes, let us see that you keep
your word.

Rosmer (with a slight hesitation). I assure you, my dear fellow, my
dearest wish would be that our intimacy should never suffer in any way.
You know, you have seemed to be my natural adviser as long as we have
known one another, even from my student days.

Kroll. I know, and I am very proud of the privilege. Is there by any
chance anything in particular just now--?

Rosmer. There are a great many things that I want very much to talk
over with you frankly--things that lie very near my heart.

Rebecca. I feel that is so, too, Mr. Rosmer. It seems to me it would be
such a good thing if you two old friends--

Kroll. Well, I can assure you I have even more to talk over with
you--because I have become an active politician, as I dare say you know.

Rosmer. Yes, I know you have. How did that come about?

Kroll. I had to, you see, whether I liked it or not. It became
impossible for me to remain an idle spectator any longer. Now that the
Radicals have become so distressingly powerful, it was high time. And
that is also why I have induced our little circle of friends in the
town to bind themselves more definitely together. It was high time, I
can tell you!

Rebecca (with a slight smile). As a matter of fact, isn't it really
rather late now?

Kroll. There is no denying it would have been more fortunate if we had
succeeded in checking the stream at an earlier point. But who could
really foresee what was coming? I am sure I could not. (Gets up and
