
Dr. Stockmann. To offer me his support too. They will support me in a
body if it should be necessary. Katherine--do you know what I have got
behind me?

Mrs. Stockmann. Behind you? No, what have you got behind you?

Dr. Stockmann. The compact majority.

Mrs. Stockmann. Really? Is that a good thing for you Thomas?

Dr. Stockmann. I should think it was a good thing. (Walks up and down
rubbing his hands.) By Jove, it's a fine thing to feel this bond of
brotherhood between oneself and one's fellow citizens!

Petra. And to be able to do so much that is good and useful, father!

Dr. Stockmann. And for one's own native town into the bargain, my child!

Mrs. Stockmann. That was a ring at the bell.

Dr. Stockmann. It must be he, then. (A knock is heard at the door.)
Come in!

Peter Stockmann (comes in from the hall). Good morning.

Dr. Stockmann. Glad to see you, Peter!

Mrs. Stockmann. Good morning, Peter, How are you?

Peter Stockmann. So so, thank you. (To DR. STOCKMANN.) I received from
you yesterday, after office hours, a report dealing with the condition
of the water at the Baths.

Dr. Stockmann. Yes. Have you read it?

Peter Stockmann. Yes, I have,

Dr. Stockmann. And what have you to say to it?

Peter Stockmann (with a sidelong glance). Hm!--

Mrs. Stockmann. Come along, Petra. (She and PETRA go into the room on
the left.)

Peter Stockmann (after a pause). Was it necessary to make all these
investigations behind my back?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, because until I was absolutely certain about it--

Peter Stockmann. Then you mean that you are absolutely certain now?

Dr. Stockmann. Surely you are convinced of that.

Peter Stockmann. Is it your intention to bring this document before the
Baths Committee as a sort of official communication?

Dr. Stockmann. Certainly. Something must be done in the matter--and
that quickly.

Peter Stockmann. As usual, you employ violent expressions in your
report. You say, amongst other things, that what we offer visitors in
our Baths is a permanent supply of poison.

Dr. Stockmann. Well, can you describe it any other way, Peter? Just
think--water that is poisonous, whether you drink it or bathe in it!
And this we offer to the poor sick folk who come to us trustfully and
pay us at an exorbitant rate to be made well again!

Peter Stockmann. And your reasoning leads you to this conclusion, that
we must build a sewer to draw off the alleged impurities from Molledal
and must relay the water conduits.

Dr. Stockmann. Yes. Do you see any other way out of it? I don't.

Peter Stockmann. I made a pretext this morning to go and see the town
engineer, and, as if only half seriously, broached the subject of these
proposals as a thing we might perhaps have to take under consideration
some time later on.

Dr. Stockmann. Some time later on!

Peter Stockmann. He smiled at what he considered to be my extravagance,
naturally. Have you taken the trouble to consider what your proposed
alterations would cost? According to the information I obtained, the
expenses would probably mount up to fifteen or twenty thousand pounds.

Dr. Stockmann. Would it cost so much?

Peter Stockmann. Yes; and the worst part of it would be that the work
would take at least two years.

Dr. Stockmann. Two years? Two whole years?

Peter Stockmann. At least. And what are we to do with the Baths in the
meantime? Close them? Indeed we should be obliged to. And do you
suppose anyone would come near the place after it had got out that the
water was dangerous?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes but, Peter, that is what it is.

Peter Stockmann. And all this at this juncture--just as the Baths are
beginning to be known. There are other towns in the neighbourhood with
qualifications to attract visitors for bathing purposes. Don't you
suppose they would immediately strain every nerve to divert the entire
stream of strangers to themselves? Unquestionably they would; and then
where should we be? We should probably have to abandon the whole thing,
which has cost us so much money-and then you would have ruined your
native town.

Dr. Stockmann. I--should have ruined--!

Peter Stockmann. It is simply and solely through the Baths that the
town has before it any future worth mentioning. You know that just as
well as I.

Dr. Stockmann. But what do you think ought to be done, then?

Peter Stockmann. Your report has not convinced me that the condition of
the water at the Baths is as bad as you represent it to be.

Dr. Stockmann. I tell you it is even worse!--or at all events it will
be in summer, when the warm weather comes.

Peter Stockmann. As I said, I believe you exaggerate the matter
considerably. A capable physician ought to know what measures to
take--he ought to be capable of preventing injurious influences or of
remedying them if they become obviously persistent.

Dr. Stockmann. Well? What more?

Peter Stockmann. The water supply for the Baths is now an established
fact, and in consequence must be treated as such. But probably the
Committee, at its discretion, will not be disinclined to consider the
