was in the same predicament as my poor Joanna.

Manders. I!

Engstrand. Good Lord, sir, I don't mean the same predicament. I mean,
suppose there were something your reverence was ashamed of in the eyes
of the world, so to speak. We men ought not judge a poor woman too
hardly, Mr. Manders.

Manders. But I am not doing so at all. It is you I am blaming.

Engstrand. Will your reverence grant me leave to ask you a small
question?

Manders. Ask away.

Engstrand. Shouldn't you say it was right for a man to raise up the
fallen?

Manders. Of course it is.

Engstrand. And isn't a man bound to keep his word of honour?

Manders. Certainly he is; but--

Engstrand. At the time when Joanna had her misfortune with this
Englishman--or maybe he was an American or a Russian, as they call
'em--well, sir, then she came to town. Poor thing, she had refused me
once or twice before; she only had eyes for good-looking men in those
days, and I had this crooked leg then. Your reverence will remember how
I had ventured up into a dancing-saloon where seafaring men were
revelling in drunkenness and intoxication, as they say. And when I
tried to exhort them to turn from their evil ways--

Mrs. Alving (coughs from the window). Ahem!

Manders. I know, Engstrand, I know--the rough brutes threw you
downstairs. You have told me about that incident before. The affliction
to your leg is a credit to you.

Engstrand. I don't want to claim credit for it, your reverence. But
what I wanted to tell you was that she came then and confided in me
with tears and gnashing of teeth. I can tell you, sir, it went to my
heart to hear her.

Manders. Did it, indeed, Engstrand? Well, what then?

Engstrand. Well, then I said to her: "The American is roaming about on
the high seas, he is. And you, Joanna," I said, "you have committed a
sin and are a fallen woman. But here stands Jacob Engstrand," I said,
"on two strong legs"--of course that was only speaking in a kind of
metaphor, as it were, your reverence.

Manders. I quite understand. Go on.

Engstrand. Well, sir, that was how I rescued her and made her my lawful
wife, so that no one should know how recklessly she had carried on with
the stranger.

Manders. That was all very kindly done. The only thing I cannot justify
was your bringing yourself to accept the money.

Engstrand. Money? I? Not a farthing.

Manders (to MRS. ALVING, in a questioning tare). But--

Engstrand. Ah, yes!--wait a bit; I remember now. Joanna did have a
trifle of money, you are quite right. But I didn't want to know
anything about that. "Fie," I said, "on the mammon of unrighteousness,
it's the price of your sin; as for this tainted gold"--or notes, or
whatever it was--"we will throw it back in the American's face," I
said. But he had gone away and disappeared on the stormy seas, your
reverence.

Manders. Was that how it was, my good fellow?

Engstrand. It was, sir. So then Joanna and I decided that the money
should go towards the child's bringing-up, and that's what became of
it; and I can give a faithful account of every single penny of it.

Manders. This alters the complexion of the affair very considerably.

Engstrand. That's how it was, your reverence. And I make bold to say
that I have been a good father to Regina--as far as was in my
power--for I am a poor erring mortal, alas!

Manders. There, there, my dear Engstrand.

Engstrand. Yes, I do make bold to say that I brought up the child, and
made my poor Joanna a loving and careful husband, as the Bible says we
ought. But it never occurred to me to go to your reverence and claim
credit for it or boast about it because I had done one good deed in
this world. No; when Jacob Engstrand does a thing like that, he holds
his tongue about it. Unfortunately it doesn't often happen, I know that
only too well. And whenever I do come to see your reverence, I never
seem to have anything but trouble and wickedness to talk about.
Because, as I said just now--and I say it again--conscience can be very
hard on us sometimes.

Manders. Give me your hand, Jacob Engstrand,

Engstrand. Oh, sir, I don't like--

Manders. No nonsense, (Grasps his hand.) That's it!

Engstrand. And may I make bold humbly to beg your reverence's pardon--

Manders. You? On the contrary it is for me to beg your pardon--

Engstrand. Oh no, sir.

Manders. Yes, certainly it is, and I do it with my whole heart. Forgive
me for having so much misjudged you. And I assure you that if I can do
anything for you to prove my sincere regret and my goodwill towards
you--

Engstrand. Do you mean it, sir?

Manders. It would give me the greatest pleasure.

Engstrand. As a matter of fact, sir, you could do it now. I am thinking
of using the honest money I have put away out of my wages up here, in
establishing a sort of Sailors' Home in the town.

Mrs. Alving. You?

Engstrand. Yes, to be a sort of Refuge, as it were, There are such
manifold temptations lying in wait for sailor men when they are roaming
about on shore. But my idea is that in this house of mine they should
