he must find some way to bring it about.

Mrs. Bernick: And do you think these American indecencies will be
permitted here?

Lona: Bosh, Betty!

Mrs. Bernick: Do you think a man like Karsten, with his strictly moral
way of thinking--

Lona: Pooh! he is not so terribly moral.

Mrs. Bernick: What have you the audacity to say?

Lona: I have the audacity to say that Karsten is not any more
particularly moral than anybody else.

Mrs. Bernick: So you still hate him as deeply as that! But what are you
doing here, if you have never been able to forget that? I cannot
understand how you, dare look him in the face after the shameful insult
you put upon him in the old days.

Lona: Yes, Betty, that time I did forget myself badly.

Mrs. Bernick: And to think how magnanimously he has forgiven you--he,
who had never done any wrong! It was not his fault that you encouraged
yourself with hopes. But since then you have always hated me too.
(Bursts into tears.) You have always begrudged me my good fortune. And
now you come here to heap all this on my head--to let the whole town
know what sort of a family I have brought Karsten into. Yes, it is me
that it all falls upon, and that is what you want. Oh, it is abominable
of you! (Goes out by the door on the left, in tears.)

Lona (looking after her): Poor Betty! (BERNICK comes in from his room.
He stops at the door to speak to KRAP.)

Bernick: Yes, that is excellent, Krap--capital! Send twenty pounds to
the fund for dinners to the poor. (Turns round.) Lona! (Comes forward.)
Are you alone? Is Betty not coming in?

Lona: No. Would you like me to call her?

Bernick: No, no--not at all. Oh, Lona, you don't know how anxious I
have been to speak openly to you--after having begged for your
forgiveness.

Lona: Look here, Karsten--do not let us be sentimental; it doesn't suit
us.

Bernick: You must listen to me, Lona. I know only too well how much
appearances are against me, as you have learnt all about that affair
with Dina's mother. But I swear to you that it was only a temporary
infatuation; I was really, truly and honestly, in love with you once.

Lona: Why do you think I have come home?

Bernick: Whatever you have in your mind, I entreat, you to do nothing
until I have exculpated myself. I can do that, Lona; at all events I
can excuse myself.

Lona: Now you are frightened. You once were in love with me, you say.
Yes, you told me that often enough in your letters; and perhaps it was
true, too--in a way--as long as you were living out in the great, free
world which gave you the courage to think freely and greatly. Perhaps
you found in me a little more character and strength of will and
independence than in most of the folk at home here. And then we kept it
secret between us; nobody could make fun of your bad taste.

Bernick: Lona, how can you think--?

Lona: But when you came back--when you heard the gibes that were made
at me on all sides--when you noticed how people laughed at what they
called my absurdities...

Bernick: You were regardless of people's opinion at that time.

Lona: Chiefly to annoy the petticoated and trousered prudes that one
met at every turn in the town. And then, when you met that seductive
young actress--

Bernick: It was a boyish escapade--nothing more; I swear to you that
there was no truth in a tenth part of the rumours and gossip that went
about.

Lona: Maybe. But then, when Betty came home--a pretty young girl,
idolised by every one--and it became known that she would inherit all
her aunt's money and that I would have nothing!

Bernick: That is just the point, Lona; and now you shall have the truth
without any beating about the bush. I did not love Betty then; I did
not break off my engagement with you because of any new attachment. It
was entirely for the sake of the money. I needed it; I had to make sure
of it.

Lona: And you have the face to tell me that?

Bernick: Yes, I have. Listen, Lona.

Lona: And yet you wrote to me that an unconquerable passion for Betty
had overcome you--invoked my magnanimity--begged me, for Betty's sake,
to hold my tongue about all that had been between us.

Bernick: I had to, I tell you.

Lona: Now, by Heaven, I don't regret that I forgot myself as I did that
time--

Bernick: Let me tell you the plain truth of how things stood with me
then. My mother, as you remember, was at the head of the business, but
she was absolutely without any business ability whatever. I was
hurriedly summoned home from Paris; times were critical, and they
relied on me to set things straight. What did I find? I found--and you
must keep this a profound secret--a house on the brink of ruin. Yes--as
good as on the brink of ruin, this old respected house which had seen
three generations of us. What else could I--the son, the only son--do
than look about for some means of saving it?

Lona: And so you saved the house of Bernick at the cost of a woman.

Bernick: You know quite well that Betty was in love with me.

Lona: But what about me?

Bernick: Believe me, Lona, you would never have been happy with me.
