do with Mortensgaard.

Kroll. I do not believe you any longer on any point. Under no
circumstances shall I have any faith in you after this. It is war to
the knife now. We shall try if we cannot make you powerless to do any
harm.

Rosmer. Oh, Kroll--how you have sunk! How low you have sunk!

Kroll. I? And a man like you has the face to say so? Remember Beata!

Rosmer. Are you harking back to that again!

Kroll. No. You must solve the riddle of the millrace as your conscience
will allow you--if you have any conscience still left. (PETER
MORTENSGAARD comes in softly and quietly, by the door on the left. He
is a short, slightly built man with sparse reddish hair and beard.
KROLL gives him a look of hatred.) The "Searchlight" too, I see.
Lighted at Rosmersholm! (Buttons up his coat.) That leaves me no doubt
as to the course I should steer.

Mortensgaard (quietly). The "Searchlight" will always be ready burning
to light Mr. Kroll home.

Kroll. Yes, you have shown me your goodwill for a long time. To be sure
there is a Commandment that forbids us to bear false witness against
our neighbour--

Mortensgaard. Mr. Kroll has no need to instruct me in the Commandments.

Kroll. Not even in the sixth?

Rosmer. Kroll--!

Mortensgaard. If I needed such instruction, Mr. Rosmer is the most
suitable person to give it me.

Kroll (with scarcely concealed scorn). Mr. Rosmer? Oh yes, the Reverend
Mr. Rosmer is undoubtedly the most suitable man for that! I hope you
will enjoy yourselves, gentlemen. (Goes out and slams the door after
him.)

Rosmer (stands looking at the door, and says to himself). Yes, yes--it
had to be so. (Turns round.) Will you tell me, Mr. Mortensgaard, what
has brought you out here to see me?

Mortensgaard. It was really Miss West I wanted to see. I thought I
ought to thank her for the kind letter I received from her yesterday.

Rosmer. I know she has written to you. Have you had a talk with her?

Mortensgaard. Yes, a little. (Smiles slightly.) I hear that there has
been a change of views in certain respects at Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. My views have changed to a very considerable extent; I might
almost say entirely.

Mortensgaard. That is what Miss West said. And that was why she thought
I ought to come up and have a little chat with you about this.

Rosmer. About what, Mr. Mortensgaard?

Mortensgaard. May I have your permission to announce in the
"Searchlight" that you have altered your opinions, and are going to
devote yourself to the cause of free thought and progress?

Rosmer. By all means. I will go so far as to ask you to make the
announcement.

Mortensgaard. Then it shall appear to-morrow. It will be a great and
weighty piece of news that the Reverend Mr. Rosmer of Rosmersholm has
made up his mind to join the forces of light in that direction too.

Rosmer. I do not quite understand you.

Mortensgaard. What I mean is that it implies the gain of strong moral
support for our party every time we win over an earnest,
Christian-minded adherent.

Rosmer (with some astonishment). Then you don't know--? Did Miss West
not tell you that as well?

Mortensgaard. What, Mr. Rosmer? Miss West was in a considerable hurry.
She told me to come up, and that I would hear the rest of it from
yourself.

Rosmer. Very well, then; let me tell you that I have cut myself free
entirely--on every side. I have now, no connection of any kind with the
tenets of the Church. For the future such matters have not the smallest
signification for me.

Mortensgaard (looking at him in perplexity). Well, if the moon had
fallen down from the sky, I could not be more--! To think that I should
ever hear you yourself renounce--!

Rosmer. Yes, I stand now where you have stood for a long time. You can
announce that in the "Searchlight" to-morrow too.

Mortensgaard. That, too? No, my dear Mr. Rosmer--you must excuse
me--but it is not worth touching on that side of the matter.

Rosmer. Not touch on it?

Mortensgaard. Not at first, I think.

Rosmer. But I do not understand--

Mortensgaard. Well, it is like this, Mr. Rosmer. You are not as
familiar with all the circumstances of the case as I am, I expect. But
if you, too, have joined the forces of freedom--and if you, as Miss
West says you do, mean to take part in the movement--I conclude you do
so with the desire to be as useful to the movement as you possibly can,
in practice as well as, in theory.

Rosmer. Yes, that is my most sincere wish.

Mortensgaard. Very well. But I must impress on you, Mr. Rosmer, that if
you come forward openly with this news about your defection from the
Church, you will tie your own hands immediately.

Rosmer. Do you think so?

Mortensgaard. Yes, you may be certain that there is not much that you
would be able to do hereabouts. And besides, Mr. Rosmer, we have quite
enough freethinkers already--indeed, I was going to say we have too
many of those gentry. What the party needs is a Christian
element--something that every one must respect. That is what we want
badly. And for that reason it is most advisable that you should hold
