it hurt her to do it. But she didn't dare do otherwise, she said; and
so I got my notice.

Dr. Stockmann (laughing and rubbing his hands). She didn't dare do
otherwise, either! It's delicious!

Mrs. Stockmann. Well, after the dreadful scenes last night--

Petra. It was not only that. Just listen to this, father!

Dr. Stockmann. Well?

Petra. Mrs. Busk showed me no less than three letters she received this
morning--

Dr. Stockmann. Anonymous, I suppose?

Petra. Yes.

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, because they didn't dare to risk signing their
names, Katherine!

Petra. And two of them were to the effect that a man, who has been our
guest here, was declaring last night at the Club that my views on
various subjects are extremely emancipated--

Dr. Stockmann. You did not deny that, I hope?

Petra. No, you know I wouldn't. Mrs. Busk's own views are tolerably
emancipated, when we are alone together; but now that this report about
me is being spread, she dare not keep me on any longer.

Mrs. Stockmann. And someone who had been a guest of ours! That shows
you the return you get for your hospitality, Thomas!

Dr. Stockmann. We won't live in such a disgusting hole any longer. Pack
up as quickly as you can, Katherine; the sooner we can get away, the
better.

Mrs. Stockmann. Be quiet--I think I hear someone in the hall. See who
it is, Petra.

Petra (opening the door). Oh, it's you, Captain Horster! Do come in.

Horster (coming in). Good morning. I thought I would just come in and
see how you were.

Dr. Stockmann (shaking his hand). Thanks--that is really kind of you.

Mrs. Stockmann. And thank you, too, for helping us through the crowd,
Captain Horster.

Petra. How did you manage to get home again?

Horster. Oh, somehow or other. I am fairly strong, and there is more
sound than fury about these folk.

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, isn't their swinish cowardice astonishing? Look
here, I will show you something! There are all the stones they have
thrown through my windows. Just look at them! I'm hanged if there are
more than two decently large bits of hard stone in the whole heap; the
rest are nothing but gravel--wretched little things. And yet they stood
out there bawling and swearing that they would do me some violence; but
as for doing anything--you don't see much of that in this town.

Horster. Just as well for you this time, doctor!

Dr. Stockmann. True enough. But it makes one angry all the same;
because if some day it should be a question of a national fight in real
earnest, you will see that public opinion will be in favour of taking
to one's heels, and the compact majority will turn tail like a flock of
sheep, Captain Horster. That is what is so mournful to think of; it
gives me so much concern, that--. No, devil take it, it is ridiculous
to care about it! They have called me an enemy of the people, so an
enemy of the people let me be!

Mrs. Stockmann. You will never be that, Thomas.

Dr. Stockmann. Don't swear to that, Katherine. To be called an ugly
name may have the same effect as a pin-scratch in the lung. And that
hateful name--I can't get quit of it. It is sticking here in the pit of
my stomach, eating into me like a corrosive acid. And no magnesia will
remove it.

Petra. Bah!--you should only laugh at them, father,

Horster. They will change their minds some day, Doctor.

Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, Thomas, as sure as you are standing here.

Dr. Stockmann. Perhaps, when it is too late. Much good may it do them!
They may wallow in their filth then and rue the day when they drove a
patriot into exile. When do you sail, Captain Horster?

Horster. Hm!--that was just what I had come to speak about--

Dr. Stockmann. Why, has anything gone wrong with the ship?

Horster. No; but what has happened is that I am not to sail in it.

Petra. Do you mean that you have been dismissed from your command?

Horster (smiling). Yes, that's just it.

Petra. You too.

Mrs. Stockmann. There, you see, Thomas!

Dr. Stockmann. And that for the truth's sake! Oh, if I had thought such
a thing possible--

Horster. You mustn't take it to heart; I shall be sure to find a job
with some ship-owner or other, elsewhere.

Dr. Stockmann. And that is this man Vik--a wealthy man, independent of
everyone and everything--! Shame on him!

Horster. He is quite an excellent fellow otherwise; he told me himself
he would willingly have kept me on, if only he had dared--

Dr. Stockmann. But he didn't dare? No, of course not.

Horster. It is not such an easy matter, he said, for a party man--

Dr. Stockmann. The worthy man spoke the truth. A party is like a
sausage machine; it mashes up all sorts of heads together into the same
mincemeat--fatheads and blockheads, all in one mash!

Mrs. Stockmann. Come, come, Thomas dear!

Petra (to HORSTER). If only you had not come home with us, things might
not have come to this pass.

Horster. I do not regret it.

Petra (holding out her hand to him). Thank you for that!

Horster (to DR. STOCKMANN). And so what I came to say was that if you
are determined to go away, I have thought of another plan--
