scarcely say that it would have to be drawn up with the greatest regard
to moderation, so as not to offend the authorities--who, after all,
have the reins in their hands. If we pay strict attention to that, no
one can take it amiss, I should think!

Hovstad. Well, and even supposing they didn't like it--

Aslaksen. No, no, no; there must be no discourtesy to the authorities,
Mr. Hovstad. It is no use falling foul of those upon whom our welfare
so closely depends. I have done that in my time, and no good ever comes
of it. But no one can take exception to a reasonable and frank
expression of a citizen's views.

Dr. Stockmann (shaking him by the hand). I can't tell you, dear Mr.
Aslaksen, how extremely pleased I am to find such hearty support among
my fellow-citizens. I am delighted--delighted! Now, you will take a
small glass of sherry, eh?

Aslaksen. No, thank you; I never drink alcohol of that kind.

Dr. Stockmann. Well, what do you say to a glass of beer, then?

Aslaksen. Nor that either, thank you, Doctor. I never drink anything as
early as this. I am going into town now to talk this over with one or
two householders, and prepare the ground.

Dr. Stockmann. It is tremendously kind of you, Mr. Aslaksen; but I
really cannot understand the necessity for all these precautions. It
seems to me that the thing should go of itself.

Aslaksen. The authorities are somewhat slow to move, Doctor. Far be it
from me to seem to blame them--

Hovstad. We are going to stir them up in the paper tomorrow, Aslaksen.

Aslaksen. But not violently, I trust, Mr. Hovstad. Proceed with
moderation, or you will do nothing with them. You may take my advice; I
have gathered my experience in the school of life. Well, I must say
goodbye, Doctor. You know now that we small tradesmen are at your back
at all events, like a solid wall. You have the compact majority on your
side Doctor.

Dr. Stockmann. I am very much obliged, dear Mr. Aslaksen, (Shakes hands
with him.) Goodbye, goodbye.

Aslaksen. Are you going my way, towards the printing-office. Mr.
Hovstad?

Hovstad, I will come later; I have something to settle up first.

Aslaksen. Very well. (Bows and goes out; STOCKMANN follows him into the
hall.)

Hovstad (as STOCKMANN comes in again). Well, what do you think of that,
Doctor? Don't you think it is high time we stirred a little life into
all this slackness and vacillation and cowardice?

Dr. Stockmann. Are you referring to Aslaksen?

Hovstad, Yes, I am. He is one of those who are floundering in a
bog--decent enough fellow though he may be, otherwise. And most of the
people here are in just the same case--see-sawing and edging first to
one side and then to the other, so overcome with caution and scruple
that they never dare to take any decided step.

Dr. Stockmann, Yes, but Aslaksen seemed to me so thoroughly
well-intentioned.

Hovstad. There is one thing I esteem higher than that; and that is for
a man to be self-reliant and sure of himself.

Dr. Stockmann. I think you are perfectly right there.

Hovstad. That is why I want to seize this opportunity, and try if I
cannot manage to put a little virility into these well-intentioned
people for once. The idol of Authority must be shattered in this town.
This gross and inexcusable blunder about the water supply must be
brought home to the mind of every municipal voter.

Dr. Stockmann. Very well; if you are of opinion that it is for the good
of the community, so be it. But not until I have had a talk with my
brother.

Hovstad. Anyway, I will get a leading article ready; and if the Mayor
refuses to take the matter up--

Dr. Stockmann. How can you suppose such a thing possible!

Hovstad. It is conceivable. And in that case--

Dr. Stockmann. In that case I promise you--. Look here, in that case
you may print my report--every word of it.

Hovstad. May I? Have I your word for it?

Dr. Stockmann (giving him the MS.). Here it is; take it with you. It
can do no harm for you to read it through, and you can give it me back
later on.

Hovstad. Good, good! That is what I will do. And now goodbye, Doctor.

Dr. Stockmann. Goodbye, goodbye. You will see everything will run quite
smoothly, Mr. Hovstad--quite smoothly.

Hovstad. Hm!--we shall see. (Bows and goes out.)

Dr. Stockmann (opens the dining-room door and looks in). Katherine! Oh,
you are back, Petra?

Petra (coming in). Yes, I have just come from the school.

Mrs. Stockmann (coming in). Has he not been here yet?

Dr. Stockmann. Peter? No, but I have had a long talk with Hovstad. He
is quite excited about my discovery, I find it has a much wider bearing
than I at first imagined. And he has put his paper at my disposal if
necessity should arise.

Mrs. Stockmann. Do you think it will?

Dr. Stockmann. Not for a moment. But at all events it makes me feel
proud to know that I have the liberal-minded independent press on my
side. Yes, and just imagine--I have had a visit from the Chairman of
the Householders' Association!

Mrs. Stockmann. Oh! What did he want?
