hissing. Some of the older men among them exchange stolen glances and
seem to be enjoying themselves. MRS. STOCKMANN gets up, looking
anxious. EJLIF and MORTEN advance threateningly upon some schoolboys
who are playing pranks. ASLAKSEN rings his bell and begs for silence.
HOVSTAD and BILLING both talk at once, but are inaudible. At last quiet
is restored.)

Aslaksen. As Chairman, I call upon the speaker to withdraw the
ill-considered expressions he has just used.

Dr. Stockmann. Never, Mr. Aslaksen! It is the majority in our community
that denies me my freedom and seeks to prevent my speaking the truth.

Hovstad. The majority always has right on its side.

Billing. And truth too, by God!

Dr. Stockmann. The majority never has right on its side. Never, I say!
That is one of these social lies against which an independent,
intelligent man must wage war. Who is it that constitute the majority
of the population in a country? Is it the clever folk, or the stupid? I
don't imagine you will dispute the fact that at present the stupid
people are in an absolutely overwhelming majority all the world over.
But, good Lord!--you can never pretend that it is right that the stupid
folk should govern the clever ones! (Uproar and cries.) Oh, yes--you
can shout me down, I know! But you cannot answer me. The majority has
might on its side--unfortunately; but right it has not. I am in the
right--I and a few other scattered individuals. The minority is always
in the right. (Renewed uproar.)

Hovstad. Aha!--so Dr. Stockmann has become an aristocrat since the day
before yesterday!

Dr. Stockmann. I have already said that I don't intend to waste a word
on the puny, narrow-chested, short-winded crew whom we are leaving
astern. Pulsating life no longer concerns itself with them. I am
thinking of the few, the scattered few amongst us, who have absorbed
new and vigorous truths. Such men stand, as it were, at the outposts,
so far ahead that the compact majority has not yet been able to come up
with them; and there they are fighting for truths that are too
newly-born into the world of consciousness to have any considerable
number of people on their side as yet.

Hovstad. So the Doctor is a revolutionary now!

Dr. Stockmann. Good heavens--of course I am, Mr. Hovstad! I propose to
raise a revolution against the lie that the majority has the monopoly
of the truth. What sort of truths are they that the majority usually
supports? They are truths that are of such advanced age that they are
beginning to break up. And if a truth is as old as that, it is also in
a fair way to become a lie, gentlemen. (Laughter and mocking cries.)
Yes, believe me or not, as you like; but truths are by no means as
long-lived at Methuselah--as some folk imagine. A normally constituted
truth lives, let us say, as a rule seventeen or eighteen, or at most
twenty years--seldom longer. But truths as aged as that are always worn
frightfully thin, and nevertheless it is only then that the majority
recognises them and recommends them to the community as wholesome moral
nourishment. There is no great nutritive value in that sort of fare, I
can assure you; and, as a doctor, I ought to know. These "majority
truths" are like last year's cured meat--like rancid, tainted ham; and
they are the origin of the moral scurvy that is rampant in our
communities.

Aslaksen. It appears to me that the speaker is wandering a long way
from his subject.

Peter Stockmann. I quite agree with the Chairman.

Dr. Stockmann. Have you gone clean out of your senses, Peter? I am
sticking as closely to my subject as I can; for my subject is precisely
this, that it is the masses, the majority--this infernal compact
majority--that poisons the sources of our moral life and infects the
ground we stand on.

Hovstad. And all this because the great, broadminded majority of the
people is prudent enough to show deference only to well-ascertained and
well-approved truths?

Dr. Stockmann. Ah, my good Mr. Hovstad, don't talk nonsense about
well-ascertained truths! The truths of which the masses now approve are
the very truths that the fighters at the outposts held to in the days
of our grandfathers. We fighters at the outposts nowadays no longer
approve of them; and I do not believe there is any other
well-ascertained truth except this, that no community can live a
healthy life if it is nourished only on such old marrowless truths.

Hovstad. But, instead of standing there using vague generalities, it
would be interesting if you would tell us what these old marrowless
truths are, that we are nourished on.

(Applause from many quarters.)

Dr. Stockmann. Oh, I could give you a whole string of such
abominations; but to begin with I will confine myself to one
well-approved truth, which at bottom is a foul lie, but upon which
nevertheless Mr. Hovstad and the "People's Messenger" and all the
"Messenger's" supporters are nourished.

Hovstad. And that is--?

Dr. Stockmann. That is, the doctrine you have inherited from your
forefathers and proclaim thoughtlessly far and wide--the doctrine that
