
Lona: Was it out of consideration for my happiness that you sacrificed
me?

Bernick: Do you suppose I acted as I did from selfish motives? If I had
stood alone then, I would have begun all over again with cheerful
courage. But you do not understand how the life of a man of business,
with his tremendous responsibilities, is bound up with that of the
business which falls to his inheritance. Do you realise that the
prosperity or the ruin of hundreds--of thousands--depends on him? Can
you not take into consideration the fact that the whole community in
which both you and I were born would have been affected to the most
dangerous extent if the house of Bernick had gone to smash?

Lon: Then is it for the sake of the community that you have maintained
your position these fifteen years upon a lie?

Bernick: Upon a lie?

Lona: What does Betty know of all this...that underlies her union with
you?

Bernick: Do you suppose that I would hurt her feelings to no purpose by
disclosing the truth?

Lona: To no purpose, you say? Well, well--You are a man of business;
you ought to understand what is to the purpose. But listen to me,
Karsten--I am going to speak the plain truth now. Tell me, are you
really happy?

Bernick: In my family life, do you mean?

Lona: Yes.

Bernick: I am, Lona. You have not been a self-sacrificing friend to me
in vain. I can honestly say that I have grown happier every year. Betty
is good and willing; and if I were to tell you how, in the course of
years, she has learned to model her character on the lines of my own--

Lona: Hm!

Bernick: At first, of course, she had a whole lot of romantic notions
about love; she could not reconcile herself to the idea that, little by
little, it must change into a quiet comradeship.

Lona: But now she is quite reconciled to that?

Bernick: Absolutely. As you can imagine, daily intercourse with me has
had no small share in developing her character. Every one, in their
degree, has to learn to lower their own pretensions, if they are to
live worthily of the community to which they belong. And Betty, in her
turn, has gradually learned to understand this; and that is why our
home is now a model to our fellow citizens.

Lona: But your fellow citizens know nothing about the lie?

Bernick: The lie?

Lona: Yes--the lie you have persisted in for these fifteen years.

Bernick: Do you mean to say that you call that--?

Lona: I call it a lie--a threefold lie: first of all, there is the lie
towards me; then, the lie towards Betty; and then, the lie towards
Johan.

Bernick: Betty has never asked me to speak.

Lona: Because she has known nothing.

Bernick: And you will not demand it--out of consideration for her.

Lona: Oh, no--I shall manage to put up with their gibes well enough; I
have broad shoulders.

Bernick: And Johan will not demand it either; he has promised me that.

Lona: But you yourself, Karsten? Do you feel within yourself no impulse
urging you to shake yourself free of this lie?

Bernick: Do you suppose that of my own free will I would sacrifice my
family happiness and my position in the world?

Lona: What right have you to the position you hold?

Bernick: Every day during these fifteen years I have earned some little
right to it--by my conduct, and by what I have achieved by my work.

Lona: True, you have achieved a great deal by your work, for yourself
as well as for others. You are the richest and most influential man in
the town; nobody in it dares do otherwise than defer to your will,
because you are looked upon as a man without spot or blemish; your home
is regarded as a model home, and your conduct as a model of conduct.
But all this grandeur, and you with it, is founded on a treacherous
morass. A moment may come and a word may be spoken, when you and all
your grandeur will be engulfed in the morass, if you do not save
yourself in time.

Bernick: Lona--what is your object in coming here?

Lona: I want to help you to get firm ground under your feet, Karsten.

Bernick: Revenge!--you want to revenge yourself! I suspected it. But
you won't succeed! There is only one person here that can speak with
authority, and he will be silent.

Lona: You mean Johan?

Bernick: Yes, Johan. If any one else accuses me, I shall deny
everything. If any one tries to crush me, I shall fight for my life.
But you will never succeed in that, let me tell you! The one who could
strike me down will say nothing--and is going away.

(RUMMEL and VIGELAND come in from the right.)

Rummel: Good morning, my dear Bernick, good morning. You must come up
with us to the Commercial Association. There is a meeting about the
railway scheme, you know.

Bernick: I cannot. It is impossible just now.

Vigeland: You really must, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: Bernick, you must. There is an opposition to us on foot.
Hammer, and the rest of those who believe in a line along the coast,
are declaring that private interests are at the back of the new
proposals.

Bernick: Well then, explain to them--

Vigeland: Our explanations have no effect, Mr. Bernick.
