
Lona: Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad, brother-in-law? Do you think I belong to
the circus troupe? No, certainly I have turned my hand to a good many
things and made a fool of myself in a good many ways--

Mrs. Rummel:  Hm!

Lona: But I have never tried circus riding.

Bernick: Then you are not--?

Mrs. Bernick:  Thank Heaven!

Lona: No, we travelled like other respectable folk, second-class,
certainly, but we are accustomed to that.

Mrs. Bernick:  We, did you say?

Bernick (taking a step for-ward): Whom do you mean by "we"?

Lona: I and the child, of course.

The Ladies (with a cry): The child!

Hilmar: What?

Rorlund: I really must say--!

Mrs. Bernick:  But what do you mean, Lona?

Lona: I mean John, of course; I have no other child, as far as I know,
but John, or Johan as you used to call him.

Mrs. Bernick:  Johan--

Mrs. Rummel (in an undertone to MRS. LYNGE): The scapegrace brother!

Bernick (hesitatingly): Is Johan with you?

Lona:  Of course he is; I certainly would not come without him. Why do
you look so tragical? And why are you sitting here in the gloom, sewing
white things? There has not been a death in the family, has there?

Rorlund: Madam, you find yourself in the Society for Fallen Women.

Lona (half to herself): What? Can these nice, quiet-looking ladies
possibly be--?

Mrs. Rummel: Well, really--!

Lona: Oh, I understand! But, bless my soul, that is surely Mrs. Rummel?
And Mrs. Holt sitting there too! Well, we three have not grown younger
since the last time we met. But listen now, good people; let the Fallen
Women wait for a day--they will be none the worse for that. A joyful
occasion like this--

Rorlund:  A home-coming is not always a joyful occasion.

Lona: Indeed? How do you read your Bible, Mr. Parson?

Rorlund: I am not a parson.

Lona: Oh, you will grow into one, then. But--faugh!--this moral linen
of yours smells tainted, just like a winding-sheet. I am accustomed to
the air of the prairies, let me tell you.

Bernick (wiping his forehead): Yes, it certainly is rather close in
here.

Lona: Wait a moment; we will resurrect ourselves from this vault.
(Pulls the curtains to one side) We must have broad daylight in here
when the boy comes. Ah, you will see a boy then that has washed himself.

Hilmar: Ugh!

Lona (opening the verandah door and window): I should say, when he has
washed himself, up at the hotel--for on the boat he got piggishly dirty.

Hilmar: Ugh, ugh!

Lona: Ugh? Why, surely isn't that--? (Points at HILDAR and asks the
others): Is he still loafing about here saying "Ugh"?

Hilmar: I do not loaf; it is the state of my health that keeps me here.

Rorlund: Ahem! Ladies, I do not think--

Lona (who has noticed OLAF): Is he yours, Betty? Give me a paw, my boy!
Or are you afraid of your ugly old aunt?

Rorlund (putting his book under his arm): Ladies, I do not think any of
us is in the mood for any more work today. I suppose we are to meet
again tomorrow?

Lona (while the others are getting up and taking their leave): Yes, let
us. I shall be on the spot.

Rorlund: You? Pardon me, Miss Hessel, but what do you propose to do in
our Society?

Lona: I will let some fresh air into it, Mr. Parson.




ACT II


(SCENE.--The same room. MRS. BERNICK is sitting alone at the
work-table, sewing. BERNICK comes in from the right, wearing his hat
and gloves and carrying a stick.)

Mrs. Bernick: Home already, Karsten?

Bernick: Yes, I have made an appointment with a man.

Mrs. Bernick (with a sigh): Oh yes, I suppose Johan is coming up here
again.

Bernick: With a man, I said. (Lays down his hat.) What has become of
all the ladies today?

Mrs. Bernick: Mrs. Rummel and Hilda hadn't time to come.

Bernick: Oh!--did they send any excuse?

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, they had so much to do at home.

Bernick: Naturally. And of course the others are not coming either?

Mrs. Bernick: No, something has prevented them today, too.

Bernick: I could have told you that, beforehand. Where is Olaf?

Mrs. Bernick: I let him go out a little with Dina.

Bernick: Hm--she is a giddy little baggage. Did you see how she at once
started making a fuss of Johan yesterday?

Mrs. Bernick: But, my dear Karsten, you know Dina knows nothing
whatever of--

Bernick: No, but in any case Johan ought to have had sufficient tact
not to pay her any attention. I saw quite well, from his face, what
Vigeland thought of it.

Mrs. Bernick (laying her sewing down on her lap): Karsten, can you
imagine what his objective is in coming here?

Bernick: Well--I know he has a farm over there, and I fancy he is not
doing particularly well with it; she called attention yesterday to the
fact that they were obliged to travel second class--

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, I am afraid it must be something of that sort. But
to think of her coming with him! She! After the deadly insult she
offered you!

Bernick: Oh, don't think about that ancient history.

Mrs. Bernick: How can I help thinking of it just now? After all, he is
my brother--still, it is not on his account that I am distressed, but
