"Indian Girl" go to sea in four--or five--days?

Krap: Yes, if Mr. Vigeland will agree to our stopping work on the "Palm
Tree" meanwhile.

Bernick: Hm--he won't. Well, be so good as to look through the letters.
And look here, did you see Olaf down at the quay?

Krap: No, Mr. Bernick. (Goes into BERNICK'S room.)

Bernick (looking at the telegram again): These gentlemen think nothing
of risking eight men's lives--

Hilmar: Well, it is a sailor's calling to brave the elements; it must
be a fine tonic to the nerves to be like that, with only a thin plank
between one and the abyss--

Bernick: I should like to see the ship-owner amongst us who would
condescend to such a thing! There is not one that would do it--not a
single one! (Sees OLAF coming up to the house.) Ah, thank Heaven, here
he is, safe and sound. (OLAF, with a fishing-line in his hand, comes
running up the garden and in through the verandah.)

Olaf: Uncle Hilmar, I have been down and seen the steamer.

Bernick: Have you been down to the quay again?

Olaf: No, I have only been out in a boat. But just think, Uncle Hilmar,
a whole circus company has come on shore, with horses and animals; and
there were such lots of passengers.

Mrs. Rummel:  No, are we really to have a circus?

Rorlund: We? I certainly have no desire to see it.

Mrs. Rummel:  No, of course I don't mean we, but--

Dina: I should like to see a circus very much.

Olaf: So should I.

Hilmar: You are a duffer. Is that anything to see? Mere tricks. No, it
would be something quite different to see the Gaucho careering over the
Pampas on his snorting mustang. But, Heaven help us, in these wretched
little towns of ours.

Olaf (pulling at MARTHA'S dress): Look, Aunt Martha! Look, there they
come!

Mrs. Holt:  Good Lord, yes--here they come.

Mrs. Lynge: Ugh, what horrid people!

(A number of passengers and a whole crowd of townsfolk, are seen coming
up the street.)

Mrs. Rummel: They are a set of mountebanks, certainly. Just look at
that woman in the grey dress, Mrs. Holt--the one with a knapsack over
her shoulder.

Mrs. Holt:  Yes--look--she has slung it on the handle of her parasol.
The manager's wife, I expect.

Mrs. Rummel:  And there is the manager himself, no doubt. He looks a
regular pirate. Don't look at him, Hilda!

Mrs. Holt: Nor you, Netta!

Olaf: Mother, the manager is bowing to us.

Bernick: What?

Mrs. Bernick: What are you saying, child?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, and--good Heavens--the woman is bowing to us too.

Bernick: That is a little too cool--

Martha (exclaims involuntarily):  Ah--!

Mrs. Bernick:  What is it, Martha?

Martha:  Nothing, nothing. I thought for a moment--

Olaf (shrieking with delight): Look, look, there are the rest of them,
with the horses and animals! And there are the Americans, too! All the
sailors from the "Indian Girl"! (The strains of "Yankee Doodle," played
on a clarinet and a drum, are heard.)

Hilmar (stopping his ears): Ugh, ugh, ugh!

Rorlund: I think we ought to withdraw ourselves from sight a little,
ladies; we have nothing to do with such goings on. Let us go to our
work again.

Mrs. Bernick: Do you think we had better draw the curtains?

Rorlund: Yes, that was exactly what I meant.

(The ladies resume their places at the work-table; RORLUND shuts the
verandah door, and draws the curtains over it and over the windows, so
that the room becomes half dark.)

Olaf (peeping out through the curtains): Mother, the manager's wife is
standing by the fountain now, washing her face.

Mrs. Bernick: What? In the middle of the marketplace?

Mrs. Rummel: And in broad daylight, too!

Hilmar: Well, I must say if I were travelling across a desert waste and
found myself beside a well, I am sure I should not stop to think
whether--. Ugh, that frightful clarinet!

Rorlund: It is really high time the police interfered.

Bernick: Oh no; we must not be too hard on foreigners. Of course these
folk have none of the deep-seated instincts of decency which restrain
us within proper bounds. Suppose they do behave outrageously, what does
it concern us? Fortunately this spirit of disorder, that flies in the
face of all that is customary and right, is absolutely a stranger to
our community, if I may say so--. What is this! (LONA HESSEL walks
briskly in from the door on the right.)

The Ladies (in low, frightened tones): The circus woman! The manager's
wife!

Mrs. Bernick: Heavens, what does this mean?

Martha (jumping up):  Ah--!

Lona:  How do you do, Betty dear! How do you do, Martha! How do you do,
brother-in-law!

Mrs. Bernick (with a cry):  Lona--!

Bernick (stumbling backwards):  As sure as I am alive--!

Mrs. Holt:  Mercy on us--!

Mrs. Rummel:  It cannot possibly be--!

Hilmar: Well! Ugh!

Mrs. Bernick:  Lona--! Is it really--?

Lona:  Really me? Yes, indeed it is; you may fall on my neck if you
like.

Hilmar: Ugh, ugh!

Mrs. Bernick:  And coming back here as--?

Mrs. Bernick:  And actually mean to appear in--?

Lona: Appear? Appear in what?

Bernick: Well, I mean--in the circus--
