mistaken, in spite of everything.

Mrs. Alving. There was no chance of mistake, more's the pity. Joanna
was obliged to confess it to me--and my husband couldn't deny it. So
there was nothing else to do but to hush it up.

Manders. No, that was the only thing to do.

Mrs. Alving. The girl was sent away at once, and was given a tolerably
liberal sum to hold her tongue. She looked after the rest herself when
she got to town. She renewed an old acquaintance with the carpenter
Engstrand; gave him a hint, I suppose, of how much money she had got,
and told him some fairy tale about a foreigner who had been here in his
yacht in the summer. So she and Engstrand were married in a great
hurry. Why, you married them yourself!

Manders. I can't understand it--, I remember clearly Engstrand's coming
to arrange about the marriage. He was full of contrition, and accused
himself bitterly for the light conduct he and his fiancee had been
guilty of.

Mrs. Alving. Of course he had to take the blame on himself.

Manders. But the deceitfulness of it! And with me, too! I positively
would not have believed it of Jacob Engstrand. I shall most certainly
give him a serious talking to. And the immorality of such a marriage!
Simply for the sake of the money--! What sum was it that the girl had?

Mrs. Alving. It was seventy pounds.

Manders. Just think of it--for a paltry seventy pounds to let yourself
be bound in marriage to a fallen woman!

Mrs. Alving. What about myself, then?--I let myself be bound in
marriage to a fallen man.

Manders. Heaven forgive you! What are you saying? A fallen man?

Mrs. Alving. Do you suppose my husband was any purer, when I went with
him to the altar, than Joanna was when Engstrand agreed to marry her?

Manders. The two cases are as different as day from night.

Mrs. Alving. Not so very different, after all. It is true there was a
great difference in the price paid, between a paltry seventy pounds and
a whole fortune.

Manders. How can you compare such totally different things! I presume
you consulted your own heart--and your relations.

Mrs. Alving (looking away from him). I thought you understood where
what you call my heart had strayed to at that time.

Manders (in a constrained voice). If I had understood anything of the
kind, I would not have been a daily guest in your husband's house.

Mrs. Alving. Well, at any rate this much is certain--I didn't consult
myself in the matter at all.

Manders. Still you consulted those nearest to you, as was only
right--your mother, your two aunts.

Mrs. Alving. Yes, that is true. The three of them settled the whole
matter for me. It seems incredible to me now, how clearly they made out
that it would be sheer folly to reject such an offer. If my mother
could only see what all that fine prospect has led to!

Manders. No one can be responsible for the result of it. Anyway there
is this to be said, that the match was made in complete conformity with
law and order.

Mrs. Alving (going to the window). Oh, law and order! I often think it
is that that is at the bottom of all the misery in the world.

Manders. Mrs. Alving, it is very wicked of you to say that.

Mrs. Alving. That may be so; but I don't attach importance to those
obligations and considerations any longer. I cannot! I must struggle
for my freedom.

Manders. What do you mean?

Mrs. Alving (taping on the window panes). I ought never to have
concealed what sort of a life my husband led. But I had not the courage
to do otherwise then--for my own sake, either. I was too much of a
coward.

Manders. A coward?

Mrs. Alving. If others had known anything of what happened, they would
have said: "Poor man, it is natural enough that he should go astray,
when he has a wife that has run away from him."

Manders. They would have had a certain amount of justification for
saying so.

Mrs. Alving (looking fixedly at him). If I had been the woman I ought,
I would have taken Oswald into my confidence and said to him: "Listen,
my son, your father was a dissolute man"--

Manders. Miserable woman.

Mrs. Alving. --and I would have told him all I have told you, from
beginning to end.

Manders. I am almost shocked at you, Mrs. Alving.

Mrs. Alving. I know. I know quite well! I am shocked at myself when I
think of it. (Comes away from the window.) I am coward enough for that.

Manders. Can you call it cowardice that you simply did your duty? Have
you forgotten that a child should love and honour his father and mother?

Mrs. Alving. Don't let us talk in such general terms. Suppose we say:
"Ought Oswald to love and honour Mr. Alving?"

Manders. You are a mother--isn't there a voice in your heart that
forbids you to shatter your son's ideals?

Mrs. Alving. And what about the truth?

Manders. What about his ideals?

Mrs. Alving. Oh--ideals, ideals! If only I were not such a coward as I
am!

Manders. Do not spurn ideals, Mrs. Alving--they have a way of avenging
themselves cruelly. Take Oswald's own case, now. He hasn't many ideals,
more's the pity. But this much I have seen, that his father is
