question of how far it might be possible to introduce certain
improvements consistently with a reasonable expenditure.

Dr. Stockmann. And do you suppose that I will have anything to do with
such a piece of trickery as that?

Peter Stockmann. Trickery!!

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, it would be a trick--a fraud, a lie, a downright
crime towards the public, towards the whole community!

Peter Stockmann. I have not, as I remarked before, been able to
convince myself that there is actually any imminent danger.

Dr. Stockmann. You have! It is impossible that you should not be
convinced. I know I have represented the facts absolutely truthfully
and fairly. And you know it very well, Peter, only you won't
acknowledge it. It was owing to your action that both the Baths and the
water conduits were built where they are; and that is what you won't
acknowledge--that damnable blunder of yours. Pooh!--do you suppose I
don't see through you?

Peter Stockmann. And even if that were true? If I perhaps guard my
reputation somewhat anxiously, it is in the interests of the town.
Without moral authority I am powerless to direct public affairs as
seems, to my judgment, to be best for the common good. And on that
account--and for various other reasons too--it appears to me to be a
matter of importance that your report should not be delivered to the
Committee. In the interests of the public, you must withhold it. Then,
later on, I will raise the question and we will do our best, privately;
but nothing of this unfortunate affair not a single word of it--must
come to the ears of the public.

Dr. Stockmann. I am afraid you will not be able to prevent that now, my
dear Peter.

Peter Stockmann. It must and shall be prevented.

Dr. Stockmann. It is no use, I tell you. There are too many people that
know about it.

Peter Stockmann. That know about it? Who? Surely you don't mean those
fellows on the "People's Messenger"?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, they know. The liberal-minded independent press is
going to see that you do your duty.

Peter Stockmann (after a short pause). You are an extraordinarily
independent man, Thomas. Have you given no thought to the consequences
this may have for yourself?

Dr. Stockmann. Consequences?--for me?

Peter Stockmann. For you and yours, yes.

Dr. Stockmann. What the deuce do you mean?

Peter Stockmann. I believe I have always behaved in a brotherly way to
you--haven't I always been ready to oblige or to help you?

Dr. Stockmann. Yes, you have, and I am grateful to you for it.

Peter Stockmann. There is no need. Indeed, to some extent I was forced
to do so--for my own sake. I always hoped that, if I helped to improve
your financial position, I should be able to keep some check on you.

Dr. Stockmann. What! Then it was only for your own sake--!

Peter Stockmann. Up to a certain point, yes. It is painful for a man in
an official position to have his nearest relative compromising himself
time after time.

Dr. Stockmann. And do you consider that I do that?

Peter Stockmann. Yes, unfortunately, you do, without even being aware
of it. You have a restless, pugnacious, rebellious disposition. And
then there is that disastrous propensity of yours to want to write
about every sort of possible and impossible thing. The moment an idea
comes into your head, you must needs go and write a newspaper article
or a whole pamphlet about it.

Dr. Stockmann. Well, but is it not the duty of a citizen to let the
public share in any new ideas he may have?

Peter Stockmann. Oh, the public doesn't require any new ideas. The
public is best served by the good, old established ideas it already has.

Dr. Stockmann. And that is your honest opinion?

Peter Stockmann. Yes, and for once I must talk frankly to you. Hitherto
I have tried to avoid doing so, because I know how irritable you are;
but now I must tell you the truth, Thomas. You have no conception what
an amount of harm you do yourself by your impetuosity. You complain of
the authorities, you even complain of the government--you are always
pulling them to pieces; you insist that you have been neglected and
persecuted. But what else can such a cantankerous man as you expect?

Dr. Stockmann. What next! Cantankerous, am I?

Peter Stockmann. Yes, Thomas, you are an extremely cantankerous man to
work with--I know that to my cost. You disregard everything that you
ought to have consideration for. You seem completely to forget that it
is me you have to thank for your appointment here as medical officer to
the Baths.

Dr. Stockmann. I was entitled to it as a matter of course!--I and
nobody else! I was the first person to see that the town could be made
into a flourishing watering-place, and I was the only one who saw it at
that time. I had to fight single-handed in support of the idea for many
years; and I wrote and wrote--

Peter Stockmann. Undoubtedly. But things were not ripe for the scheme
then--though, of course, you could not judge of that in your
out-of-the-way corner up north. But as soon as the opportune moment
