with my scattered writings?

Kroll. No, I must candidly confess that--

Rebecca. I have read several of them. My foster-father had them.

Brendel. My dear lady, then you have wasted your time. They are simply
trash, allow me to tell you.

Rebecca. Really?

Brendel. Those you have read, yes. My really important works no man or
woman knows anything about. No one--except myself.

Rebecca. How is that?

Brendel. Because they are not yet written.

Rosmer. But, my dear Mr. Brendel--

Brendel. You know, my dear John, that I am a bit of a sybarite--a
gourmet. I have always been so. I have a taste for solitary enjoyment,
because in that way my enjoyment is twice--ten times--as keen. It is,
like this. When I have been wrapped in a haze of golden dreams that
have descended on me--when new, intoxicating, momentous thoughts have
had their birth in my mind, and I have been fanned by the beat of their
wings as they bore me aloft--at such moments I have transformed them
into poetry, into visions, into pictures. In general outlines, that is
to say.

Rosmer. Quite so.

Brendel. You cannot imagine the luxury of enjoyment I have experienced!
The mysterious rapture of creation!--in, general outlines, as I said.
Applause, gratitude, eulogies, crowns of laurel!--all these I have
culled with full hands trembling with joy. In my secret ecstasies I
have steeped myself in a happiness so, intoxicating--

Kroll. Ahem!

Rosmer. But you have never written anything of it down?

Brendel. Not a word. The thought of the dull clerk's work that it would
mean has always moved me to a nauseating sense of disgust. Besides, why
should I profane my own ideals when I could enjoy them, in all their
purity, by myself? But now they shall be sacrificed. Honestly, I feel
as a mother must do when she entrusts her young daughter to the arms of
a husband. But I am going to, sacrifice them nevertheless--sacrifice
them on the altar of emancipation. A series of carefully thought-out
lectures, to be delivered all over the country!

Rebecca (impetuously). That is splendid of you, Mr. Brendel! You are
giving up the most precious thing you possess.

Rosmer. The only thing.

Rebecca (looking meaningly at ROSMER). I wonder how many there are who
would do as much--who dare do it?

Rosmer (returning her look). Who knows?

Brendel. My audience is moved. That refreshes my heart and strengthens
my will--and now I shall proceed upon my task forthwith. There is one
other point, though. (To KROLL.) Can you inform me, sir, whether there
is an Abstainers' Society in the town? A Total Abstainers' Society? I
feel sure there must be.

Kroll. There is one, at your service. I am the president.

Brendel. I could tell that as soon as I saw you! Well, it is not at all
impossible that I may come to you and become a member for a week.

Kroll. Excuse me--we do not accept weekly members.

Brendel. A la bonne heure, my good sir. Ulrik Brendel has never been in
the habit of forcing himself upon societies of that kind. (Turns to go)
But I must not prolong my stay in this house, rich as it is in
memories. I must go into the town and find some suitable lodging. I
shall find a decent hotel of some kind there, I hope?

Rebecca. Will you not have something hot to drink before you go?

Brendel. Of what nature, dear lady?

Rebecca. A cup of tea, or--

Brendel. A thousand thanks to the most generous of hostesses!--but I do
not like trespassing on private hospitality. (Waves his hand.) Good-bye
to you all! (Goes to the door, but turns back.) Oh, by the
way--John--Mr. Rosmer--will you do your former tutor a service for old
friendship's sake?

Rosmer. With the greatest of pleasure.

Brendel. Good. Well, then, lend me--just for a day or two--a starched
shirt.

Rosmer. Nothing more than that!

Brendel. Because, you see, I am travelling on foot--on this occasion.
My trunk is being sent after me.

Rosmer. Quite so. But, in that case, isn't there anything else?

Brendel. Well, I will tell you what--perhaps you have an old, worn-out
summer coat that you could spare?

Rosmer. Certainly I have.

Brendel. And if there happened to be a pair of presentable shoes that
would go with the coat.

Rosmer. I am sure we can manage that, too. As soon as you let us know
your address, we will send the things to you.

Brendel. Please don't think of it! No one must be put to any
inconvenience on my account! I will take the trifles with me.

Rosmer. Very well. Will you come upstairs with me, then?

Rebecca. Let me go. Mrs. Helseth and I will see about it.

Brendel. I could never think of allowing this charming lady--

Rebecca. Nonsense! Come along, Mr. Brendel. (She goes out by the door
on the right.)

Rosmer (holding BRENDEL back). Tell me--is there no other way I can be
of service to you?

Brendel. I am sure I do not know of any. Yes, perdition seize it!--now
that I come to think of it--John, do you happen to have seven or eight
shillings on you?

Rosmer. I will see. (Opens his purse.) I have two half-sovereigns here.

Brendel. Oh, well, never mind. I may as well take them. I can always
