comes. We shan't be able to see it, of course. That stands to reason--two old fogies, like us. Peter Stockmann. Really, really! I must say that is an extremely odd expression to-- Dr. Stockmann. Oh, you mustn't take me too literally, Peter. I am so heartily happy and contented, you know. I think it is such an extraordinary piece of good fortune to be in the middle of all this growing, germinating life. It is a splendid time to live in! It is as if a whole new world were being created around one. Peter Stockmann. Do you really think so? Dr. Stockmann. Ah, naturally you can't appreciate it as keenly as I. You have lived all your life in these surroundings, and your impressions have been blunted. But I, who have been buried all these years in my little corner up north, almost without ever seeing a stranger who might bring new ideas with him--well, in my case it has just the same effect as if I had been transported into the middle of a crowded city. Peter Stockmann. Oh, a city--! Dr. Stockmann. I know, I know; it is all cramped enough here, compared with many other places. But there is life here--there is promise--there are innumerable things to work for and fight for; and that is the main thing. (Calls.) Katherine, hasn't the postman been here? Mrs. Stockmann (from the dining-room). No. Dr. Stockmann. And then to be comfortably off, Peter! That is something one learns to value, when one has been on the brink of starvation, as we have. Peter Stockmann. Oh, surely-- Dr. Stockmann. Indeed I can assure you we have often been very hard put to it, up there. And now to be able to live like a lord! Today, for instance, we had roast beef for dinner--and, what is more, for supper too. Won't you come and have a little bit? Or let me show it you, at any rate? Come here-- Peter Stockmann. No, no--not for worlds! Dr. Stockmann. Well, but just come here then. Do you see, we have got a table-cover? Peter Stockmann. Yes, I noticed it. Dr. Stockmann. And we have got a lamp-shade too. Do you see? All out of Katherine's savings! It makes the room so cosy. Don't you think so? Just stand here for a moment--no, no, not there--just here, that's it! Look now, when you get the light on it altogether. I really think it looks very nice, doesn't it? Peter Stockmann. Oh, if you can afford luxuries of this kind-- Dr. Stockmann. Yes, I can afford it now. Katherine tells me I earn almost as much as we spend. Peter Stockmann. Almost--yes! Dr. Stockmann. But a scientific man must live in a little bit of style. I am quite sure an ordinary civil servant spends more in a year than I do. Peter Stockmann. I daresay. A civil servant--a man in a well-paid position... Dr. Stockmann. Well, any ordinary merchant, then! A man in that position spends two or three times as much as-- Peter Stockmann. It just depends on circumstances. Dr. Stockmann. At all events I assure you I don't waste money unprofitably. But I can't find it in my heart to deny myself the pleasure of entertaining my friends. I need that sort of thing, you know. I have lived for so long shut out of it all, that it is a necessity of life to me to mix with young, eager, ambitious men, men of liberal and active minds; and that describes every one of those fellows who are enjoying their supper in there. I wish you knew more of Hovstad. Peter Stockmann. By the way, Hovstad was telling me he was going to print another article of yours. Dr. Stockmann. An article of mine? Peter Stockmann. Yes, about the Baths. An article you wrote in the winter. Dr. Stockmann. Oh, that one! No, I don't intend that to appear just for the present. Peter Stockmann. Why not? It seems to me that this would be the most opportune moment. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, very likely--under normal conditions. (Crosses the room.) Peter Stockmann (following him with his eyes). Is there anything abnormal about the present conditions? Dr. Stockmann (standing still). To tell you the truth, Peter, I can't say just at this moment--at all events not tonight. There may be much that is very abnormal about the present conditions--and it is possible there may be nothing abnormal about them at all. It is quite possible it may be merely my imagination. Peter Stockmann. I must say it all sounds most mysterious. Is there something going on that I am to be kept in ignorance of? I should have imagined that I, as Chairman of the governing body of the Baths-- Dr. Stockmann. And I should have imagined that I--. Oh, come, don't let us fly out at one another, Peter. Peter Stockmann. Heaven forbid! I am not in the habit of flying out at people, as you call it. But I am entitled to request most emphatically that all arrangements shall be made in a businesslike manner, through the proper channels, and shall be dealt with by the legally constituted authorities. I can allow no going behind our backs by any roundabout means. Dr. Stockmann. Have I ever at any time tried to go behind your backs? Peter Stockmann. You have an ingrained tendency to take your own way, 