Billing? Billing. I have both blue and white here. Aslaksen (going to him). That will do nicely; we shall get on more quickly that way. Cut it up into small strips--yes, that's it. (To the meeting.) Blue means no; white means yes. I will come round myself and collect votes. (PETER STOCKMANN leaves the hall. ASLAKSEN and one or two others go round the room with the slips of paper in their hats.) 1st Citizen (to HOVSTAD). I say, what has come to the Doctor? What are we to think of it? Hovstad. Oh, you know how headstrong he is. 2nd Citizen (to BILLING). Billing, you go to their house--have you ever noticed if the fellow drinks? Billing. Well I'm hanged if I know what to say. There are always spirits on the table when you go. 3rd Citizen. I rather think he goes quite off his head sometimes. 1st Citizen. I wonder if there is any madness in his family? Billing. I shouldn't wonder if there were. 4th Citizen. No, it is nothing more than sheer malice; he wants to get even with somebody for something or other. Billing. Well certainly he suggested a rise in his salary on one occasion lately, and did not get it. The Citizens (together). Ah!--then it is easy to understand how it is! The Drunken Man (who has got among the audience again). I want a blue one, I do! And I want a white one too! Voices. It's that drunken chap again! Turn him out! Morten Kiil. (going up to DR. STOCKMANN). Well, Stockmann, do you see what these monkey tricks of yours lead to? Dr. Stockmann. I have done my duty. Morten Kiil. What was that you said about the tanneries at Molledal? Dr. Stockmann. You heard well enough. I said they were the source of all the filth. Morten Kiil. My tannery too? Dr. Stockmann. Unfortunately your tannery is by far the worst. Morten Kiil. Are you going to put that in the papers? Dr. Stockmann. I shall conceal nothing. Morten Kiil. That may cost you dearly, Stockmann. (Goes out.) A Stout Man (going UP to CAPTAIN HORSTER, Without taking any notice of the ladies). Well, Captain, so you lend your house to enemies of the people? Horster. I imagine I can do what I like with my own possessions, Mr. Vik. The Stout Man. Then you can have no objection to my doing the same with mine. Horster. What do you mean, sir? The Stout Man. You shall hear from me in the morning. (Turns his back on him and moves off.) Petra. Was that not your owner, Captain Horster? Horster. Yes, that was Mr. Vik the shipowner. Aslaksen (with the voting-papers in his hands, gets up on to the platform and rings his bell). Gentlemen, allow me to announce the result. By the votes of every one here except one person-- A Young Man. That is the drunk chap! Aslaksen. By the votes of everyone here except a tipsy man, this meeting of citizens declares Dr. Thomas Stockmann to be an enemy of the people. (Shouts and applause.) Three cheers for our ancient and honourable citizen community! (Renewed applause.) Three cheers for our able and energetic Mayor, who has so loyally suppressed the promptings of family feeling! (Cheers.) The meeting is dissolved. (Gets down.) Billing. Three cheers for the Chairman! The whole crowd. Three cheers for Aslaksen! Hurrah! Dr. Stockmann. My hat and coat, Petra! Captain, have you room on your ship for passengers to the New World? Horster. For you and yours we will make room, Doctor. Dr. Stockmann (as PETRA helps him into his coat), Good. Come, Katherine! Come, boys! Mrs. Stockmann (in an undertone). Thomas, dear, let us go out by the back way. Dr. Stockmann. No back ways for me, Katherine, (Raising his voice.) You will hear more of this enemy of the people, before he shakes the dust off his shoes upon you! I am not so forgiving as a certain Person; I do not say: "I forgive you, for ye know not what ye do." Aslaksen (shouting). That is a blasphemous comparison, Dr. Stockmann! Billing. It is, by God! It's dreadful for an earnest man to listen to. A Coarse Voice. Threatens us now, does he! Other Voices (excitedly). Let's go and break his windows! Duck him in the fjord! Another Voice. Blow your horn, Evensen! Pip, pip! (Horn-blowing, hisses, and wild cries. DR. STOCKMANN goes out through the hall with his family, HORSTER elbowing a way for them.) The Whole Crowd (howling after them as they go). Enemy of the People! Enemy of the People! Billing (as he puts his papers together). Well, I'm damned if I go and drink toddy with the Stockmanns tonight! (The crowd press towards the exit. The uproar continues outside; shouts of "Enemy of the People!" are heard from without.) ACT V (SCENE.--DR. STOCKMANN'S study. Bookcases and cabinets containing specimens, line the walls. At the back is a door leading to the hall; in the foreground on the left, a door leading to the sitting-room. In the righthand wall are two windows, of which all the panes are broken. The DOCTOR'S desk, littered with books and papers, stands in the middle of the room, which is in disorder. It is morning. DR. STOCKMANN in dressing-gown, slippers and a smoking-cap, is bending down and raking 