came I--and the others--took the matter into our hands. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, and made this mess of all my beautiful plan. It is pretty obvious now what clever fellows you were! Peter Stockmann. To my mind the whole thing only seems to mean that you are seeking another outlet for your combativeness. You want to pick a quarrel with your superiors--an old habit of yours. You cannot put up with any authority over you. You look askance at anyone who occupies a superior official position; you regard him as a personal enemy, and then any stick is good enough to beat him with. But now I have called your attention to the fact that the town's interests are at stake--and, incidentally, my own too. And therefore, I must tell you, Thomas, that you will find me inexorable with regard to what I am about to require you to do. Dr. Stockmann. And what is that? Peter Stockmann. As you have been so indiscreet as to speak of this delicate matter to outsiders, despite the fact that you ought to have treated it as entirely official and confidential, it is obviously impossible to hush it up now. All sorts of rumours will get about directly, and everybody who has a grudge against us will take care to embellish these rumours. So it will be necessary for you to refute them publicly. Dr. Stockmann. I! How? I don't understand. Peter Stockmann. What we shall expect is that, after making further investigations, you will come to the conclusion that the matter is not by any means as dangerous or as critical as you imagined in the first instance. Dr. Stockmann. Oho!--so that is what you expect! Peter Stockmann. And, what is more, we shall expect you to make public profession of your confidence in the Committee and in their readiness to consider fully and conscientiously what steps may be necessary to remedy any possible defects. Dr. Stockmann. But you will never be able to do that by patching and tinkering at it--never! Take my word for it, Peter; I mean what I say, as deliberately and emphatically as possible. Peter Stockmann. As an officer under the Committee, you have no right to any individual opinion. Dr. Stockmann (amazed). No right? Peter Stockmann. In your official capacity, no. As a private person, it is quite another matter. But as a subordinate member of the staff of the Baths, you have no right to express any opinion which runs contrary to that of your superiors. Dr. Stockmann. This is too much! I, a doctor, a man of science, have no right to--! Peter Stockmann. The matter in hand is not simply a scientific one. It is a complicated matter, and has its economic as well as its technical side. Dr. Stockmann. I don't care what it is! I intend to be free to express my opinion on any subject under the sun. Peter Stockmann. As you please--but not on any subject concerning the Baths. That we forbid. Dr. Stockmann (shouting). You forbid--! You! A pack of-- Peter Stockmann. I forbid it--I, your chief; and if I forbid it, you have to obey. Dr. Stockmann (controlling himself). Peter--if you were not my brother-- Petra (throwing open the door). Father, you shan't stand this! Mrs. Stockmann (coming in after her). Petra, Petra! Peter Stockmann. Oh, so you have been eavesdropping. Mrs. Stockmann. You were talking so loud, we couldn't help it! Petra. Yes, I was listening. Peter Stockmann. Well, after all, I am very glad-- Dr. Stockmann (going up to him). You were saying something about forbidding and obeying? Peter Stockmann. You obliged me to take that tone with you. Dr. Stockmann. And so I am to give myself the lie, publicly? Peter Stockmann. We consider it absolutely necessary that you should make some such public statement as I have asked for. Dr. Stockmann. And if I do not--obey? Peter Stockmann. Then we shall publish a statement ourselves to reassure the public. Dr. Stockmann. Very well; but in that case I shall use my pen against you. I stick to what I have said; I will show that I am right and that you are wrong. And what will you do then? Peter Stockmann. Then I shall not be able to prevent your being dismissed. Dr. Stockmann. What--? Petra. Father--dismissed! Mrs. Stockmann. Dismissed! Peter Stockmann. Dismissed from the staff of the Baths. I shall be obliged to propose that you shall immediately be given notice, and shall not be allowed any further participation in the Baths' affairs. Dr. Stockmann. You would dare to do that! Peter Stockmann. It is you that are playing the daring game. Petra. Uncle, that is a shameful way to treat a man like father! Mrs. Stockmann. Do hold your tongue, Petra! Peter Stockmann (looking at PETRA). Oh, so we volunteer our opinions already, do we? Of course. (To MRS. STOCKMANN.) Katherine, I imagine you are the most sensible person in this house. Use any influence you may have over your husband, and make him see what this will entail for his family as well as-- Dr. Stockmann. My family is my own concern and nobody else's! Peter Stockmann. --for his own family, as I was saying, as well as for 