have put the essential facts before the public in such a way that every fair-minded citizen can easily form his own opinion. From it you will see that the main result of the Medical Officer's proposals--apart from their constituting a vote of censure on the leading men of the town--would be to saddle the ratepayers with an unnecessary expenditure of at least some thousands of pounds. (Sounds of disapproval among the audience, and some cat-calls.) Aslaksen (ringing his bell). Silence, please, gentlemen! I beg to support the Mayor's motion. I quite agree with him that there is something behind this agitation started by the Doctor. He talks about the Baths; but it is a revolution he is aiming at--he wants to get the administration of the town put into new hands. No one doubts the honesty of the Doctor's intentions--no one will suggest that there can be any two opinions as to that, I myself am a believer in self-government for the people, provided it does not fall too heavily on the ratepayers. But that would be the case here; and that is why I will see Dr. Stockmann damned--I beg your pardon--before I go with him in the matter. You can pay too dearly for a thing sometimes; that is my opinion. (Loud applause on all sides.) Hovstad. I, too, feel called upon to explain my position. Dr. Stockmann's agitation appeared to be gaining a certain amount of sympathy at first, so I supported it as impartially as I could. But presently we had reason to suspect that we had allowed ourselves to be misled by misrepresentation of the state of affairs-- Dr. Stockmann. Misrepresentation--! Hovstad. Well, let us say a not entirely trustworthy representation. The Mayor's statement has proved that. I hope no one here has any doubt as to my liberal principles; the attitude of the "People's Messenger" towards important political questions is well known to everyone. But the advice of experienced and thoughtful men has convinced me that in purely local matters a newspaper ought to proceed with a certain caution. Aslaksen. I entirely agree with the speaker. Hovstad. And, in the matter before us, it is now an undoubted fact that Dr. Stockmann has public opinion against him. Now, what is an editor's first and most obvious duty, gentlemen? Is it not to work in harmony with his readers? Has he not received a sort of tacit mandate to work persistently and assiduously for the welfare of those whose opinions he represents? Or is it possible I am mistaken in that? Voices from the crowd. No, no! You are quite right! Hovstad. It has cost me a severe struggle to break with a man in whose house I have been lately a frequent guest--a man who till today has been able to pride himself on the undivided goodwill of his fellow-citizens--a man whose only, or at all events whose essential, failing is that he is swayed by his heart rather than his head. A few scattered voices. That is true! Bravo, Stockmann! Hovstad. But my duty to the community obliged me to break with him. And there is another consideration that impels me to oppose him, and, as far as possible, to arrest him on the perilous course he has adopted; that is, consideration for his family-- Dr. Stockmann. Please stick to the water-supply and drainage! Hovstad. --consideration, I repeat, for his wife and his children for whom he has made no provision. Morten. Is that us, mother? Mrs. Stockmann. Hush! Aslaksen. I will now put the Mayor's proposition to the vote. Dr. Stockmann. There is no necessity! Tonight I have no intention of dealing with all that filth down at the Baths. No; I have something quite different to say to you. Peter Stockmann (aside). What is coming now? A Drunken Man (by the entrance door). I am a ratepayer! And therefore, I have a right to speak too! And my entire--firm--inconceivable opinion is-- A number of voices. Be quiet, at the back there! Others. He is drunk! Turn him out! (They turn him out.) Dr. Stockmann. Am I allowed to speak? Aslaksen (ringing his bell). Dr. Stockmann will address the meeting. Dr. Stockmann. I should like to have seen anyone, a few days ago, dare to attempt to silence me as has been done tonight! I would have defended my sacred rights as a man, like a lion! But now it is all one to me; I have something of even weightier importance to say to you. (The crowd presses nearer to him, MORTEN Kiil conspicuous among them.) Dr. Stockmann (continuing). I have thought and pondered a great deal, these last few days--pondered over such a variety of things that in the end my head seemed too full to hold them-- Peter Stockmann (with a cough). Ahem! Dr. Stockmann. --but I got them clear in my mind at last, and then I saw the whole situation lucidly. And that is why I am standing here to-night. I have a great revelation to make to you, my fellow-citizens! I will impart to you a discovery of a far wider scope than the trifling matter that our water supply is poisoned and our medicinal Baths are standing on pestiferous soil. A number of voices (shouting). Don't talk about the Baths! We won't 