hear you! None of that! Dr. Stockmann. I have already told you that what I want to speak about is the great discovery I have made lately--the discovery that all the sources of our moral life are poisoned and that the whole fabric of our civic community is founded on the pestiferous soil of falsehood. Voices of disconcerted Citizens. What is that he says? Peter Stockmann. Such an insinuation--! Aslaksen (with his hand on his bell). I call upon the speaker to moderate his language. Dr. Stockmann. I have always loved my native town as a man only can love the home of his youthful days. I was not old when I went away from here; and exile, longing and memories cast as it were an additional halo over both the town and its inhabitants. (Some clapping and applause.) And there I stayed, for many years, in a horrible hole far away up north. When I came into contact with some of the people that lived scattered about among the rocks, I often thought it would of been more service to the poor half-starved creatures if a veterinary doctor had been sent up there, instead of a man like me. (Murmurs among the crowd.) Billing (laying down his pen). I'm damned if I have ever heard--! Hovstad. It is an insult to a respectable population! Dr. Stockmann. Wait a bit! I do not think anyone will charge me with having forgotten my native town up there. I was like one of the eider-ducks brooding on its nest, and what I hatched was the plans for these Baths. (Applause and protests.) And then when fate at last decreed for me the great happiness of coming home again--I assure you, gentlemen, I thought I had nothing more in the world to wish for. Or rather, there was one thing I wished for--eagerly, untiringly, ardently--and that was to be able to be of service to my native town and the good of the community. Peter Stockmann (looking at the ceiling). You chose a strange way of doing it--ahem! Dr. Stockmann. And so, with my eyes blinded to the real facts, I revelled in happiness. But yesterday morning--no, to be precise, it was yesterday afternoon--the eyes of my mind were opened wide, and the first thing I realised was the colossal stupidity of the authorities--. (Uproar, shouts and laughter, MRS. STOCKMANN coughs persistently.) Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman! Aslaksen (ringing his bell). By virtue of my authority--! Dr. Stockmann. It is a petty thing to catch me up on a word, Mr. Aslaksen. What I mean is only that I got scent of the unbelievable piggishness our leading men had been responsible for down at the Baths. I can't stand leading men at any price!--I have had enough of such people in my time. They are like billy-goats on a young plantation; they do mischief everywhere. They stand in a free man's way, whichever way he turns, and what I should like best would be to see them exterminated like any other vermin--. (Uproar.) Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman, can we allow such expressions to pass? Aslaksen (with his hand on his bell). Doctor--! Dr. Stockmann. I cannot understand how it is that I have only now acquired a clear conception of what these gentry are, when I had almost daily before my eyes in this town such an excellent specimen of them--my brother Peter--slow-witted and hide-bound in prejudice--. (Laughter, uproar and hisses. MRS. STOCKMANN Sits coughing assiduously. ASLAKSEN rings his bell violently.) The Drunken Man (who has got in again). Is it me he is talking about? My name's Petersen, all right--but devil take me if I-- Angry Voices. Turn out that drunken man! Turn him out. (He is turned out again.) Peter Stockmann. Who was that person? 1st Citizen. I don't know who he is, Mr. Mayor. 2nd Citizen. He doesn't belong here. 3rd Citizen. I expect he is a navvy from over at--(the rest is inaudible). Aslaksen. He had obviously had too much beer. Proceed, Doctor; but please strive to be moderate in your language. Dr. Stockmann. Very well, gentlemen, I will say no more about our leading men. And if anyone imagines, from what I have just said, that my object is to attack these people this evening, he is wrong--absolutely wide of the mark. For I cherish the comforting conviction that these parasites--all these venerable relics of a dying school of thought--are most admirably paving the way for their own extinction; they need no doctor's help to hasten their end. Nor is it folk of that kind who constitute the most pressing danger to the community. It is not they who are most instrumental in poisoning the sources of our moral life and infecting the ground on which we stand. It is not they who are the most dangerous enemies of truth and freedom amongst us. Shouts from all sides. Who then? Who is it? Name! Name! Dr. Stockmann. You may depend upon it--I shall name them! That is precisely the great discovery I made yesterday. (Raises his voice.) The most dangerous enemy of truth and freedom amongst us is the compact majority--yes, the damned compact Liberal majority--that is it! Now you know! (Tremendous uproar. Most of the crowd are shouting, stamping and 