well-disposed to me at a moment when I am working for an objective which will mean the advancement of the general welfare. Well, then, can I do otherwise than as I am doing? The question, let me tell you, turns upon this--whether your home is to be supported, as you put it, or whether hundreds of new homes are to be prevented from existing--hundreds of homes that will never be built, never have a fire lighted on their hearth, unless I succeed in carrying through the scheme I am working for now. That is the reason why I have given you your choice. Aune: Well, if that is the way things stand, I have nothing more to say. Bernick: Hm--my dear Aune, I am extremely grieved to think that we are to part. Aune: We are not going to part, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: How is that? Aune: Even a common man like myself has something he is bound to maintain. Bernick: Quite so, quite so--then I presume you think you may promise--? Aune: The "Indian Girl" shall be ready to sail the day after tomorrow. (Bows and goes out to the right.) Bernick: Ah, I have got the better of that obstinate fellow! I take it as a good omen. (HILMAR comes in through the garden door, smoking a cigar.) Hilmar (as he comes up the steps to the verandah): Good morning, Betty! Good morning, Karsten! Mrs. Bernick: Good morning. Hilmar: Ah, I see you have been crying, so I suppose you know all about it too? Mrs. Bernick: Know all about what? Hilmar: That the scandal is in full swing. Ugh! Bernick: What do you mean? Hilmar (coming into the room): Why, that our two friends from America are displaying themselves about the streets in the company of Dina Dorf. Mrs. Bernick (coming in after him): Hilmar, is it possible? Hilmar: Yes, unfortunately, it is quite true. Lona was even so wanting in tact as to call after me, but of course I appeared not to have heard her. Bernick: And no doubt all this has not been unnoticed. Hilmar: You may well say that. People stood still and looked at them. It spread like wildfire through the town--just like a prairie fire out West. In every house people were at the windows waiting for the procession to pass, cheek by jowl behind the curtains--ugh! Oh, you must excuse me, Betty, for saying "ugh"--this has got on my nerves. If it is going on, I shall be forced to think about getting right away from here. Mrs. Bernick: But you should have spoken to him and represented to him that-- Hilmar: In the open street? No, excuse me, I could not do that. To think that the fellow should dare to show himself in the town at all! Well, we shall see if the Press doesn't put a stopper on him; yes--forgive me, Betty, but-- Bernick: The Press, do you say? Have you heard a hint of anything of the sort? Hilmar: There are such things flying about. When I left here yesterday evening I looked in at the club, because I did not feel well. I saw at once, from the sudden silence that fell when I went in, that our American couple had been the subject of conversation. Then that impudent newspaper fellow, Hammer, came in and congratulated me at the top of his voice on the return of my rich cousin. Bernick: Rich? Hilmar: Those were his words. Naturally I looked him up and down in the manner he deserved, and gave him to understand that I knew nothing about Johan Tonnesen's being rich. "Really," he said, "that is very remarkable. People usually get on in America when they have something to start with, and I believe your cousin did not go over there quite empty-handed." Bernick: Hm--now will you oblige me by-- Mrs. Bernick (distressed): There, you see, Karsten! Hilmar: Anyhow, I have spent a sleepless night because of them. And here he is, walking about the streets as if nothing were the matter. Why couldn't he disappear for good and all? It really is insufferable how hard some people are to kill. Mrs. Bernick: My dear Hilmar, what are you saying P Hilmar: Oh, nothing. But here this fellow escapes with a whole skin from railway accidents and fights with California grizzlies and Blackfoot Indians--has not even been scalped--. Ugh, here they come! Bernick (looking down the street): Olaf is with them too! Hilmar: Of course! They want to remind everybody that they belong to the best family in the town. Look there!--look at the crowd of loafers that have come out of the chemist's to stare at them and make remarks. My nerves really won't stand it; how a man is to be expected to keep the banner of the Ideal flying under such circumstances, I-- Bernick: They are coming here. Listen, Betty; it is my particular wish that you should receive them in the friendliest possible way. Mrs. Bernick: Oh, may I, Karsten. Bernick: Certainly, certainly--and you too, Hilmar. It is to be hoped they will not stay here very long; and when we are quite by ourselves--no allusions to the past; we must not hurt their feelings in any way. Mrs. Bernick: How magnanimous you are, Karsten! Bernick: Oh, don't speak of that. Mrs. Bernick: But you must let me thank you; and you must forgive me 