 Johan: Who is it that for the last fifteen years has benefited by that shameful rumour? Bernick: You will drive me to desperation! Well, if you speak, I shall deny everything! I shall say it is a plot against me--that you have come here to blackmail me! Lona: For shame, Karsten! Bernick: I am a desperate man, I tell you, and I shall fight for my life. I shall deny everything--everything! Johan: I have your two letters. I found them in my box among my other papers. This morning I read them again; they are plain enough. Bernick: And will you make them public? Johan: If it becomes necessary. Bernick: And you will be back here in two months? Johan: I hope so. The wind is fair. In three weeks I shall be in New York--if the "Indian Girl" does not go to the bottom. Bernick (with a start): Go to the bottom? Why should the "Indian Girl" go to the bottom? Johan: Quite so--why should she? Bernick (scarcely audibly): Go to the bottom? Johan: Well, Karsten, now you know what is before you. You must find your own way out. Good-bye! You can say good-bye to Betty for me, although she has not treated me like a sister. But I must see Martha. She shall tell Dina---; she shall promise me--(Goes out through the farther door on the left.) Bernick (to himself): The "Indian Girl"--? (Quickly.) Lona, you must prevent that! Lona: You see for yourself, Karsten--I have no influence over him any longer. (Follows JOHAN into the other room.) Bernick (a prey to uneasy thoughts): Go to the bottom--? (AUNE comes in from the right.) Aune: Excuse me, sir, but if it is convenient-- Bernick (turning round angrily): What do you want? Aune: To know if I may ask you a question, sir. Bernick: Be quick about it, then. What is it? Aune: I wanted to ask if I am to consider it as certain--absolutely certain--that I should be dismissed from the yard if the "Indian Girl" were not ready to sail tomorrow? Bernick: What do you mean? The ship is ready to sail? Aune: Yes--it is. But suppose it were not, should I be discharged? Bernick: What is the use of asking such idle questions? Aune: Only that I should like to know, sir. Will you answer me that?--should I be discharged? Bernick: Am I in the habit of keeping my word or not? Aune: Then tomorrow I should have lost the position I hold in my house and among those near and dear to me--lost my influence over men of my own class--lost all opportunity of doing anything for the cause of the poorer and needier members of the community? Bernick: Aune, we have discussed all that before. Aune: Quite so--then the "Indian Girl" will sail. (A short silence.) Bernick: Look here--it is impossible for me to have my eyes everywhere--I cannot be answerable for everything. You can give me your assurance, I suppose, that the repairs have been satisfactorily carried out? Aune: You gave me very short grace, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: But I understand you to warrant the repairs? Aune: The weather is fine, and it is summer. (Another pause.) Bernick: Have you anything else to say to me? Aune: I think not, sir. Bernick: Then--the "Indian Girl" will sail... Aune: Tomorrow? Bernick: Yes. Aune: Very good. (Bows and goes out. BERNICK stands for a moment irresolute; then walks quickly towards the door, as if to call AUNE back; but stops, hesitatingly, with his hand on the door-handle. At that moment the door is opened from without, and KRAP comes in.) Krap (in a low voice): Aha, he has been here. Has he confessed? Bernick: Hm--; have you discovered anything? Krap: What need of that, sir? Could you not see the evil conscience looking out of the man's eyes? Bernick: Nonsense--such things don't show. Have you discovered anything, I want to know? Krap: I could not manage it; I was too late. They had already begun hauling the ship out of the dock. But their very haste in doing that plainly shows that-- Bernick: It shows nothing. Has the inspection taken place, then? Krap: Of course; but-- Bernick: There, you see! And of course they found nothing to complain of? Krap: Mr. Bernick, you know very well how much this inspection means, especially in a yard that has such a good name as ours has. Bernick: No matter--it takes all responsibility off us. Krap: But, sir, could you really not tell from Aune's manner that--? Bernick: Aune has completely reassured me, let me tell you. Krap: And let me tell you, sir, that I am morally certain that-- Bernick: What does this mean, Krap? I see plainly enough that you want to get your knife into this man; but if you want to attack him, you must find some other occasion. You know how important it is to me--or, I should say, to the owners--that the "Indian Girl" should sail to-morrow. Krap: Very well--so be it; but if ever we hear of that ship again--hm! (VIGELAND comes in from the right.) Vigeland: I wish you a very good morning, Mr. Bernick. Have you a moment to spare? Bernick: At your service, Mr. Vigeland. Vigeland: I only want to know if you are also of opinion that the "Palm 