walks up and down.) Anyway, my eyes are completely opened now; for the spirit of revolt has spread even into my school. Rosmer. Into the school? Surely not into your school? Kroll. Indeed it has. Into my own school. What do you think of this? I have got wind of the fact that the boys in the top class--or rather, a part of the boys in it--have formed themselves into a secret society and have been taking in Mortensgaard's paper! Rebecca. Ah, the "Searchlight". Kroll. Yes, don't you think that is a nice sort of intellectual pabulum for future public servants? But the saddest part of it is that it is all the most promising boys in the class that have conspired together and hatched this plot against me. It is only the duffers and dunces that have held aloof from it. Rebecca. Do you take it so much to heart, Mr. Kroll? Kroll. Do I take it to heart, to find myself so hampered and thwarted in my life's work? (Speaking more gently.) I might find it in my heart to say that I could even take that for what it is worth; but I have not told you the worst of it yet. (Looks round the room.) I suppose nobody is likely to be listening at the doors? Rebecca. Oh, certainly not. Kroll. Then let me tell you that the revolt and dissension has spread into my own home--into my own peaceful home--and has disturbed the peace of my family life. Rosmer (getting up). Do you mean it? In your own home? Rebecca (going up to Kroll). Dear Mr. Kroll, what has happened? Kroll. Would you believe it that my own children--. To make a long story short, my boy Laurits is the moving spirit of the conspiracy at the school. And Hilda has embroidered a red portfolio to keep the numbers of the "Searchlight" in. Rosmer. I should never have dreamed of such a thing; in your family--in your own house! Kroll. No, who would ever have dreamed of such a thing? In my house, where obedience and order have always ruled--where hitherto there has never been anything but one unanimous will-- Rebecca. How does your wife take it? Kroll. Ah, that is the most incredible part of the whole thing. She, who all her days--in great things and small--has concurred in my opinions and approved of all my views, has actually not refrained from throwing her weight on the children's side on many points. And now she considers I am to blame for what has happened. She says I try to coerce the young people too much. Just as if it were not necessary to--. Well, those are the sort of dissensions I have going on at home. But naturally I talk as little about it as possible; it is better to be silent about such things. (Walks across the floor.) Oh, yes.--Oh, yes. (Stands by the window, with his hands behind his back, and looks out.) Rebecca (goes up to ROSMER, and speaks in low, hurried tones, unheard by KROLL). Do it! Rosmer (in the same tone). Not to-night. Rebecca (as before). Yes, this night of all others. (Goes away from him and adjusts the lamp.) Kroll (coming back). Yes, my dear John, so now you know the sort of spirit of the age that has cast its shadow both over my home life and my official work. Ought I not to oppose this appalling, destructive, disorganising tendency with all the weapons I can lay my hands upon? Of course it is certainly my duty--and that both with my pen and my tongue. Rosmer. But have you any hope that you can produce any effect in that way? Kroll. At all events I mean to take my share in the fight as a citizen. And I consider that it is the duty of every patriotic man, every man who is concerned about what is right, to do the same. And, I may as well tell you, that is really the reason why I have come here to see you to-night. Rosmer. My dear fellow, what do you mean? What can I--? Kroll. You are going to help your old friends, and do as we are doing--take your share in it to the best of your ability. Rebecca. But, Mr. Kroll, you know how little taste Mr. Rosmer has for that sort of thing. Kroll. Then he has got to overcome that distaste now. You do not keep abreast of the times, John. You sit here and bury yourself in your historical researches. Goodness knows, I have the greatest respect for family pedigrees and all that they imply. But this is not the time for such occupations, unhappily. You have no conception of the state of affairs that is going on all over the country. Every single idea is turned upside down, or very nearly so. It will be a hard fight to get all the errors straightened out again. Rosmer. I can quite believe it. But that sort of a fight is not in my line at all. Rebecca. Besides, I rather fancy that Mr. Rosmer has come to look at the affairs of life with wider opened eyes than before. Kroll (with a start). Wider opened eyes? Rebecca. Yes, or with an opener mind--with less prejudice. Kroll. What do you mean by that? John--surely you could never be so weak as to allow yourself to be deluded by the accidental circumstance that the demagogues have scored a temporary success! Rosmer. My dear fellow, you know very well that I am no judge of 