the other. Was that the reason, then, why you left the service of the Church? Rosmer. Yes. When my mind was clearly made up--when I felt the certainty that it Was not merely a transitory temptation, but that it was something that I would neither have the power nor the desire to dismiss from my mind--then I took that step. Kroll. So it has been fermenting in your mind as long as that. And we--your friends--have never been allowed to know anything of it. Rosmer, Rosmer--how could you hide the sorrowful truth from us! Rosmer. Because I considered it was a matter that only concerned myself; and therefore I did not wish to cause you and my other friends any unnecessary pain. I thought I should be able to live my life here as I have done hitherto--peacefully and happily. I wanted to read, and absorb myself in all the works that so far had been sealed books to me--to familiarise myself thoroughly with the great world of truth and freedom that has been disclosed to me now. Kroll. An apostate. Every word you say bears witness to that. But, for all that, why have you made this confession of your secret apostasy? Or why just at the present moment? Rosmer. You yourself have compelled me to it, Kroll. Kroll. I? I have compelled you? Rosmer. When I heard of your violent behaviour at public meetings--when I read the reports of all the vehement speeches you made there of all your bitter attacks upon those that were on the other side--your scornful censure of your opponents--oh, Kroll, to think that you--you--could be the man to do that!--then my eyes were opened to my imperative duty. Mankind is suffering from the strife that is going on now, and we ought to bring peace and happiness and a spirit of reconciliation into their souls. That is why I step forward now and confess myself openly for what I am--and, besides, I want to put my powers to the test, as well as others. Could not you--from your side--go with me in that, Kroll? Kroll. Never, as long as I live, will I make any alliance with the forces of disorder in the community. Rosmer. Well, let us at least fight with honourable weapons, since it seems we must fight. Kroll. I can have nothing more to do with any one who does not think with me on matters of vital importance, and I owe such a man no consideration. Rosmer. Does that apply even to me? Kroll. You yourself have broken with me, Rosmer. Rosmer. But does this really mean a breach between us? Kroll. Between us! It is a breach with all those who have hitherto stood shoulder to shoulder with you. And now you must take the consequences. (REBECCA comes in from the room on the right and opens the door wide.) Rebecca. Well, that is done! We have started him off on the road to his great sacrifice, and now we can go in to supper. Will you come in, Mr. Kroll? Kroll (taking his hat). Good-night, Miss West. This is no longer any place for me. Rebecca (excitedly). What do you mean? (Shuts the door and comes nearer to the two men.) Have you told him--? Rosmer. He knows now. Kroll. We shall not let you slip out of our hands, Rosmer. We shall compel you to come back to us again. Rosmer. I shall never find myself there any more. Kroll. We shall see. You are not the man to endure standing alone. Rosmer. I am not so entirely alone, even now. There are two of us to bear the solitude together here. Kroll. Ah! (A suspicion appears to cross his mind.) That too! Beata's words! Rosmer. Beata's? Kroll (dismissing the thought from his mind). No, no--that was odious of me. Forgive me. Rosmer. What? What do you mean? Kroll. Think no more about it. I am ashamed of it. Forgive me--and good-bye. (Goes out by the door to the hall.) Rosmer (following him). Kroll! We cannot end everything between us like this. I will come and see you to-morrow. Kroll (turning round in the hall). You shall not set your foot in my house. (Takes his stick and goes.) (ROSMER stands for a while at the open door; then shuts it and comes back into the room.) Rosmer. That does not matter, Rebecca. We shall be able to go through with it, for all that--we two trusty friends--you and I. Rebecca. What do you suppose he meant just now when he said he was ashamed of himself? Rosmer. My dear girl, don't bother your head about that. He didn't even believe what he meant, himself. But I will go and see him tomorrow. Goodnight! Rebecca. Are you going up so early to-night--after this? Rosmer. As early to-night as I usually do. I feel such a sense of relief now that it is over. You see, my dear Rebecca, I am perfectly calm--so you take it calmly, too. Good-night. Rebecca. Good-night, dear friend--and sleep well! (ROSMER goes out by the door to the lobby; then his footsteps are heard as he goes upstairs. REBECCA goes to the wall and rings a bell, which is answered by MRS. HELSETH.) You can clear the table again, Mrs. Helseth. Mr. Rosmer does not want anything, and Mr. Kroll has gone home. Mrs. Helseth. Gone home? What was wrong with him, miss? Rebecca (taking up her crochet-work). He prophesied that there was a 