on--you, who have no mother's eyes for your son--! Mrs. Bernick: Listen to me, do! Bernick: Why did you not look after him? Now I have lost him. Give him back to me, if you can. Mrs. Bernick: I can! I have got him. Bernick: You have got him! The Men: Ah! Hilmar: Yes, I thought so. Martha: You have got him back, Karsten. Lona: Yes--make him your own, now. Bernick: You have got him! Is that true? Where is he? Mrs. Bernick: I shall not tell you, till you have forgiven him. Bernick: Forgiven! But how did you know--? Mrs. Bernick: Do you not think a mother sees? I was in mortal fear of your getting to know anything about it. Some words he let fall yesterday--and then his room was empty, and his knapsack and clothes missing... Bernick: Yes, yes? Mrs. Bernick: I ran, and got hold of Aune; we went out in his boat; the American ship was on the point of sailing. Thank God, we were in time--got on board--searched the hold--found him! Oh, Karsten, you must not punish him! Bernick: Betty! Mrs. Bernick: Nor Aune, either! Bernick: Aune? What do you know about him? Is the "Indian Girl" under sail again? Mrs. Bernick: No, that is just it. Bernick: Speak, speak! Mrs. Bernick: Aune was just as agitated as I was; the search took us some time; it had grown dark, and the pilot made objections; and so Aune took upon himself--in your name-- Bernick: Well? Mrs. Bernick: To stop the ship's sailing till tomorrow. Krap: Hm-- Bernick: Oh, how glad I am! Mrs. Bernick: You are not angry? Bernick: I cannot tell you how glad I am, Betty Rummel: You really take things far too seriously. Hilmar: Oh yes, as soon as it is a question of a little struggle with the elements--ugh! Krap (going to the window): The procession is just coming through your garden gate, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: Yes, they can come now. Rummel: The whole garden is full of people. Sandstad: The whole street is crammed. Rummel: The whole town is afoot, Bernick. It really is a moment that makes one proud. Vigeland: Let us take it in a humble spirit, Mr. Rummel. Rummel: All the banners are out! What a procession! Here comes the committee with Mr. Rorlund at their head. Bernick: Yes, let them come in! Rummel: But, Bernick--in your present agitated frame of mind-- Bernick: Well, what? Rummel: I am quite willing to speak instead of you, if you like. Bernick: No, thank you; I will speak for myself tonight. Rummel: But are you sure you know what to say? Bernick: Yes, make your mind easy, Rummel--I know now what to say. (The music grows louder. The verandah door is opened. RORLUND comes in, at the head of the Committee, escorted by a couple of hired waiters, who carry a covered basket. They are followed by townspeople of all classes, as many as can get into the room. An apparently endless crowd of people, waving banners and flags, are visible in the garden and the street.) Rorlund: Mr. Bernick! I see, from the surprise depicted upon your face, that it is as unexpected guests that we are intruding upon your happy family circle and your peaceful fireside, where we find you surrounded by honoured and energetic fellow citizens and friends. But it is our hearts that have bidden us come to offer you our homage--not for the first time, it is true, but for the first time on such a comprehensive scale. We have on many occasions given you our thanks for the broad moral foundation upon which you have, so to speak, reared the edifice of our community. On this occasion we offer our homage especially to the clear-sighted, indefatigable, unselfish--nay, self-sacrificing citizen who has taken the initiative in an undertaking which, we are assured on all sides, will give a powerful impetus to the temporal prosperity and welfare of our community. Voices: Bravo, bravo! Rorlund: You, sir, have for many years been a shining example in our midst. This is not the place for me to speak of your family life, which has been a model to us all; still less to enlarge upon your unblemished personal character. Such topics belong to the stillness of a man's own chamber, not to a festal occasion such as this! I am here to speak of your public life as a citizen, as it lies open to all men's eyes. Well-equipped vessels sail away from your shipyard and carry our flag far and wide over the seas. A numerous and happy band of workmen look up to you as to a father. By calling new branches of industry into existence, you have laid the foundations of the welfare of hundreds of families. In a word--you are, in the fullest sense of the term, the mainstay of our community. Voices: Hear, hear! Bravo! Rorlund: And, sir, it is just that disinterestedness, which colours all your conduct, that is so beneficial to our community--more so than words can express--and especially at the present moment. You are now on the point of procuring for us what I have no hesitation in calling bluntly by its prosaic name--a railway! Voices: Bravo, bravo! Rorlund: But it would seem as though the undertaking were beset by 