 Bernick: Last year it was quite another thing. At that time it was a question of a line along the coast-- Vigeland: Which would have been quite superfluous, Mr. Rorlund; because, of course, we have our steamboat service-- Sandstad: And would have been quite unreasonably costly-- Rummel: Yes, and would have absolutely ruined certain important interests in the town. Bernick: The main point was that it would not have been to the advantage of the community as a whole. That is why I opposed it, with the result that the inland line was resolved upon. Hilmar: Yes, but surely that will not touch the towns about here. Bernick: It will eventually touch our town, my dear Hilmar, because we are going to build a branch line here. Hilmar: Aha--a new scheme, then? Rummel: Yes, isn't it a capital scheme? What? Rorlund: Hm!-- Vigeland: There is no denying that it looks as though Providence had just planned the configuration of the country to suit a branch line. Rorlund: Do you really mean it, Mr. Vigeland? Bernick: Yes, I must confess it seems to me as if it had been the hand of Providence that caused me to take a journey on business this spring, in the course of which I happened to traverse a valley through which I had never been before. It came across my mind like a flash of lightning that this was where we could carry a branch line down to our town. I got an engineer to survey the neighbourhood, and have here the provisional calculations and estimate; so there is nothing to hinder us. Mrs. Bernick (who is still with the other ladies at the verandah door): But, my dear Karsten, to think that you should have kept it all a secret from us! Bernick: Ah, my dear Betty, I knew you would not have been able to grasp the exact situation. Besides, I have not mentioned it to a living soul until today. But now the decisive moment has come, and we must work openly and with all our might. Yes, even if I have to risk all I have for its sake, I mean to push the matter through. Rummel: And we will back you up, Bernick; you may rely upon that. Rorlund: Do you really promise us so much, then, from this undertaking, gentlemen? Bernick: Yes, undoubtedly. Think what a lever it will be to raise the status of our whole community. Just think of the immense tracts of forest-land that it will make accessible; think of all the rich deposits of minerals we shall be able to work; think of the river with one waterfall above another! Think of the possibilities that open out in the way of manufactories! Rorlund: And are you not afraid that an easier intercourse with the depravity of the outer world--? Bernick: No, you may make your mind quite easy on that score, Mr. Rorlund. Our little hive of industry rests now-a-days, God be thanked, on such a sound moral basis; we have all of us helped to drain it, if I may use the expression; and that we will continue to do, each in his degree. You, Mr. Rorlund, will continue your richly blessed activity in our schools and our homes. We, the practical men of business, will be the support of the community by extending its welfare within as wide a radius as possible; and our women--yes, come nearer ladies--you will like to hear it--our women, I say, our wives and daughters--you, ladies--will work on undisturbed in the service of charity, and moreover will be a help and a comfort to your nearest and dearest, as my dear Betty and Martha are to me and Olaf.(Looks around him.) Where is Olaf today? Mrs. Bernick: Oh, in the holidays it is impossible to keep him at home. Bernick: I have no doubt he is down at the shore again. You will see he will end by coming to some harm there. Hilmar: Bah! A little sport with the forces of nature Mrs. Rummel: Your family affection is beautiful, Mr. Bernick! Bernick: Well, the family is the kernel of society. A good home, honoured and trusty friends, a little snug family circle where no disturbing elements can cast their shadow-- (KRAP comes in from the right, bringing letters and papers.) Krap: The foreign mail, Mr. Bernick--and a telegram from New York. Bernick (taking the telegram): Ah--from the owners of the "Indian Girl". Rummel: Is the mail in? Oh, then you must excuse me. Vigeland: And me too. Sandstad: Good day, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: Good day, good day, gentlemen. And remember, we have a meeting this afternoon at five o'clock. The Three Men: Yes--quite so--of course. (They go out to the right.) Bernick (who has read the telegram): This is thoroughly American! Absolutely shocking! Mrs. Bernick: Good gracious, Karsten, what is it? Bernick: Look at this, Krap! Read it! Krap (reading): "Do the least repairs possible. Send over 'Indian Girl' as soon as she is ready to sail; good time of year; at a pinch her cargo will keep her afloat." Well, I must say-- Rorlund: You see the state of things in these vaunted great communities! Bernick: You are quite right; not a moment's consideration for human life, when it is a question of making a profit. (To KRAP:) Can the 