his room, opens it and calls in.) Krap, stop the "Indian Girl"--she must not sail tonight! Krap (from within): The "Indian Girl" is already standing out to sea, Mr. Bernick. Bernick (shutting the door and speaking faintly): Too late--and all to no purpose-- Lona: What do you mean? Bernick: Nothing, nothing. Leave me alone! Lona: Hm!--look here, Karsten. Johan was good enough to say that he entrusted to me the good name and reputation that he once lent to you, and also the good name that you stole from him while he was away. Johan will hold his tongue; and I can act just as I please in the matter. See, I have two letters in my hand. Bernick: You have got them! And you mean now--this very evening-perhaps when the procession comes-- Lona: I did not come back here to betray you, but to stir your conscience so that you should speak of your own free will. I did not succeed in doing that--so you must remain as you are, with your life founded upon a lie. Look, I am tearing your two letters in pieces. Take the wretched things--there you are. Now there is no evidence against you, Karsten. You are safe now; be happy, too--if you can. Bernick (much moved): Lona--why did you not do that sooner! Now it is too late; life no longer seems good to me; I cannot live on after today. Lona: What has happened? Bernick: Do not ask me--But I must live on, nevertheless! I will live--for Olaf's sake. He shall make amends for everything--expiate everything. Lona: Karsten--! (HILMAR comes hurriedly back.) Hilmar: I cannot find anyone; they are all out--even Betty! Bernick: What is the matter with you? Hilmar: I daren't tell you. Bernick: What is it? You must tell me! Hilmar: Very well--Olaf has run away, on board the "Indian Girl." Bernick (stumbling back): Olaf--on board the "Indian Girl"! No, no! Lona: Yes, he is! Now I understand--I saw him jump out of the window. Bernick (calls in through the door of his room in a despairing voice): Krap, stop the "Indian Girl" at any cost! Krap: It is impossible, sir. How can you suppose--? Bernick: We must stop her; Olaf is on board! Krap: What! Rummel (coming out of BERNICK'S room): Olaf, run away? Impossible! Sandstad (following him): He will be sent back with the pilot, Mr. Bernick. Hilmar: No, no; he has written to me. (Shows the letter.) He says he means to hide among the cargo till they are in the open sea. Bernick: I shall never see him again! Rummel: What nonsense!--a good strong ship, newly repaired... Vigeland (who has followed the others out of BERNICK'S room): And in your own yard, Mr. Bernick! Bernick: I shall never see him again, I tell you. I have lost him, Lona; and--I see it now--he never was really mine. (Listens.) What is that? Rummel: Music. The procession must be coming. Bernick. I cannot take any part in it--I will not. Rummel: What are you thinking of! That is impossible. Sandstad: Impossible, Mr. Bernick; think what you have at stake. Bernick: What does it all matter to me now? What have I to work for now? Rummel: Can you ask? You have us and the community. Vigeland: Quite true. Sandstad: And surely, Mr. Bernick, you have not forgotten that we--.(MARTHA comes in through the farther door to the left. Music is heard in the distance, down the street.) Martha: The procession is just coming, but Betty is not in the house. I don't understand where she-- Bernick: Not in the house! There, you see, Lona--no support to me, either in gladness or in sorrow. Rummel: Draw back the curtains! Come and help me, Mr. Krap--and you, Mr. Sandstad. It is a thousand pities that the family should not be united just now; it is quite contrary to the program. (They draw back all the curtains. The whole street is seen to be illuminated. Opposite the house is a large transparency, bearing the words: "Long live Karsten Bernick, Pillar of our Society ") Bernick (shrinking back): Take all that away! I don't want to see it! Put it out, put it out! Rummel: Excuse me, Mr. Bernick, but are you not well? Martha: What is the matter with him, Lona? Lona: Hush! (Whispers to her.) Bernick: Take away those mocking words, I tell you! Can't you see that all these lights are grinning at us? Rummel: Well, really, I must confess-- Bernick: Oh, how could you understand--! But I, I--! It is all like candles in a dead-room! Rummel: Well, let me tell you that you are taking the thing a great deal too seriously. Sandstad: The boy will enjoy a trip across the Atlantic, and then you will have him back. Vigeland: Only put your trust in the Almighty, Mr. Bernick. Rummel: And in the vessel, Bernick; it is not likely to sink, I know. Krap: Hm-- Rummel: Now if it were one of those floating coffins that one hears are sent out by men in the bigger countries-- Bernick: I am sure my hair must be turning grey-- (MRS. BERNICK comes in from the garden, with a shawl thrown over her head.) Mrs. Bernick: Karsten, Karsten, do you know--? Bernick: Yes. I know; but you--you, who see nothing that is going 