politics; but it certainly seems to me that of late years individual thought has become somewhat more independent. Kroll. Quite so--but do you consider that as a matter of course to be a good thing? In any case you are vastly mistaken, my friend. Just inquire a little into the opinions that are current amongst the Radicals, both out here in the country and in town. You will find them to be nothing else than the words of wisdom that appear in the "Searchlight". Rebecca. Yes, Mortensgaard has a great deal of influence over the people about here. Kroll. Yes, just think of it--a man with as dirty a record as his! A fellow that was turned out of his place as a schoolmaster because of his immoral conduct! This is the sort of man that poses as a leader of the people! And successfully, too!--actually successfully! I hear that he means to enlarge his paper now. I know, on reliable authority, that he is looking for a competent assistant. Rebecca. It seems to me surprising that you and your friends do not start an opposition paper. Kroll. That is exactly what we intend to do. This very day we have bought the "County News." There was no difficulty about the financial side of the matter; but-- (Turns towards ROSMER) Now we have come to the real purport of my visit. It is the Management of it--the editorial management--that is the difficulty, you see. Look here, Rosmer--don't you feel called upon to undertake it, for the sake of the good cause? Rosmer (in a tone of consternation). I! Rebecca. How can you think of such a thing! Kroll. I can quite understand your having a horror of public meetings and being unwilling to expose yourself to the mercies of the rabble that frequents them. But an editor's work, which is carried on in much greater privacy, or rather-- Rosmer. No, no, my dear fellow, you must not ask that of me. Kroll. It would give me the greatest pleasure to have a try at work of that sort myself--only it would be quite out of the question for me; I am already saddled with such an endless number of duties. You, on the other hand, who are no longer hampered by any official duties, might--. Of course the rest of us would give you all the help in our power. Rosmer. I cannot do it, Kroll. I am not fitted for it. Kroll. Not fitted for it? That was just what you said when your father got you your living. Rosmer. I was quite right; and that was why I resigned it, too. Kroll. Well, if you only make as good an editor as you did a parson, we shall be quite satisfied. Rosmer. My dear Kroll--once for all--I cannot do it. Kroll. Well, then, I suppose you will give us the use of your name, at all events? Rosmer. My name? Kroll. Yes, the mere fact of John Rosmer's name being connected with it will be a great advantage to the paper. We others are looked upon as pronounced partisans. I myself even have the reputation of being a wicked fanatic, I am told. Therefore we cannot count upon our own names to give us any particular help in making the paper known to the misguided masses. But you, on the contrary, have always held aloof from this kind of fighting. Your gentle and upright disposition, your polished mind, your unimpeachable honour, are known to and appreciated by every one about here. And then there is the deference and respect that your former position as a clergyman ensures for you--and, besides that, there is the veneration in which your family, name is held! Rosmer. Oh, my family name. Kroll (pointing to the portraits). Rosmers of Rosmersholm--clergymen, soldiers, men who have filled high places in the state--men of scrupulous honour, every one of them--a family that has been rooted here, the most influential in the place, for nearly two centuries. (Lays his hand on ROSMER'S shoulder.) John, you owe it to yourself and to the traditions of your race to join us in defence of all that has hitherto been held sacred in our community. (Turning to REBECCA.) What do you say, Miss West? Rebecca (with a quiet little laugh). my dear Mr. Kroll--it all sounds so absurdly ludicrous to me. Kroll. What! Ludicrous? Rebecca. Yes, because it is time you were told plainly-- Rosmer (hurriedly). No, no--don't! Not now! Kroll (looking from one to the other). But, my dear friends, what on earth--? (Breaks off, as MRS. HELSETH comes in, by the door on the right.) Ahem! Mrs. Helseth. There is a man at the kitchen door, sir. He says he wants to see you. Rosmer (in a relieved voice). Is there? Well, ask him to come in. Mrs. Helseth. Shall I show him in here, sir? Rosmer. Certainly. Mrs. Helseth. But he doesn't look the sort of man one ought to allow in here. Rebecca. What does he look like, Mrs. Helseth? Mrs. Helseth. Oh, he is not much to look at, Miss. Rosmer. Did he not give you his name? Mrs. Helseth. Yes, I think he said it was Hekman, or something like that. Rosmer. I do not know any one of that name. Mrs. Helseth. And he said his Christian name was Ulrik. Rosmer (with a start of surprise). Ulrik Hetman! Was that it? 