allude to them in the "Searchlight". Rosmer. Does she mention any names? Mortensgaard. No. Rosmer. Who brought you the letter? Mortensgaard. I promised not to tell that. It was brought to me one evening after dark. Rosmer. If you had made inquiries at the time, you would have learnt that my poor unhappy wife was not fully accountable for her actions. Mortensgaard. I did make inquiries, Mr. Rosmer; but I must say I did not get exactly that impression. Rosmer. Not?--But why have you chosen this moment to enlighten me as to the existence of this old crazy letter? Mortensgaard. With the object of advising you to be extremely cautious, Mr. Rosmer. Rosmer. As to my way of life, do you mean? Mortensgaard. Yes. You must remember that for the future you will not be unassailable. Rosmer. So you persist in thinking that I have something to conceal here? Mortensgaard. I do not see any reason why a man of emancipated ideas should refrain from living his life as fully as possible. Only, as I have already said, you should be cautious in future. If rumours should get about of anything that offends people's prejudices, you may be quite certain that the whole cause of freedom of thought will suffer for it. Good-bye, Mr. Rosmer. Rosmer. Good-bye. Mortensgaard. I shall go straight to the printing-office now and have the great piece of news inserted in the "Searchlight". Rosmer. Put it all in. Mortensgaard. I will put in as much as there is any need for the public to know. (Bows, and goes out. ROSMER stands at the door, while MORTENSGAARD goes downstairs. The front door is heard shutting.) Rosmer (still standing in the doorway, calls softly). Rebecca! Reb--ahem! (Calls loudly.) Mrs. Helseth--is Miss West downstairs? Mrs. Helseth (from below). No, sir, she is not here. (The curtain at the end of the room is drawn back, disclosing REBECCA standing in the doorway.) Rebecca. John! Rosmer (turning round). What! Were you in there, in my bedroom! My dear, what were you doing there? Rebecca (going up to him). I have been listening. Rosmer. Rebecca! Could you do a thing like that? Rebecca. Indeed I could. It was so horrid the way he said that--about my morning wrapper. Rosmer. Ah, so you were in there too when Kroll--? Rebecca. Yes. I wanted to know what was at the bottom of his mind. Rosmer. You know I would have told you. Rebecca. I scarcely think you would have told me everything--certainly not in his own words. Rosmer. Did you hear everything, then? Rebecca. Most of it, I think. I had to go down for a moment when Mortensgaard came. Rosmer. And then came up again? Rebecca. Do not take it ill of me, dear friend. Rosmer. Do anything that you think right and proper. You have full freedom of action.--But what do you say to it all, Rebecca? Ah, I do not think I have ever stood so much in need of you as I do to-day. Rebecca. Surely both you and I have been prepared for what would happen some day. Rosmer. No, no--not for this. Rebecca. Not for this? Rosmer. It is true that I used to think that sooner or later our beautiful pure friendship would come to be attacked by calumny and suspicion--not on Kroll's part, for I never would have believed such a thing of him--but on the part of the coarse-minded and ignoble-eyed crowd. Yes, indeed; I had good reason enough for so jealously drawing a veil of concealment over our compact. It was a dangerous secret. Rebecca. Why should we pay any heed to what all these other people think? You and I know that we have nothing to reproach ourselves with. Rosmer. I? Nothing to reproach myself with? It is true enough that I thought so until to-day. But now, now, Rebecca-- Rebecca. Yes? Now? Rosmer. How am I to account to myself for Beata's horrible accusation? Rebecca (impetuously). Oh, don't talk about Beata! Don't think about Beata any more! She is dead, and you seemed at last to have been able to get away from the thought of her. Rosmer. Since I have learnt of this, it seems just as if she had come to life again in some uncanny fashion. Rebecca. Oh no--you must not say that, John! You must not! Rosmer. I tell you it is so. We must try and get to the bottom of it. How can she have strayed into such a woeful misunderstanding of me? Rebecca. Surely you too are not beginning to doubt that she was very nearly insane? Rosmer. Well, I cannot deny it is just of that fact that I feel I cannot be so altogether certain any longer. And besides if it were so-- Rebecca. If it were so? What then? Rosmer. What I mean is--where are we to look for the actual cause of her sick woman's fancies turning into insanity? Rebecca. What good can it possibly do for you to indulge in such speculations! Rosmer. I cannot do otherwise, Rebecca. I cannot let this doubt go on gnawing at my heart, however unwilling I may be to face it. Rebecca. But it may become a real danger to you to be perpetually dwelling on this one lugubrious topic. Rosmer (walking about restlessly and absorbed in the idea). I must have 