it is quite true--because there was a danger of the whole project of the Baths coming to nothing if they failed us. But now the scheme has been carried through, and we can dispense with these grand gentlemen. Dr. Stockmann. Dispense with them, yes; but, we owe them a great debt of gratitude. Hovstad. That shall be recognised ungrudgingly, But a journalist of my democratic tendencies cannot let such an opportunity as this slip. The bubble of official infallibility must be pricked. This superstition must be destroyed, like any other. Dr. Stockmann. I am whole-heartedly with you in that, Mr. Hovstad; if it is a superstition, away with it! Hovstad. I should be very reluctant to bring the Mayor into it, because he is your brother. But I am sure you will agree with me that truth should be the first consideration. Dr. Stockmann. That goes without saying. (With sudden emphasis.) Yes, but--but-- Hovstad. You must not misjudge me. I am neither more self-interested nor more ambitious than most men. Dr. Stockmann. My dear fellow--who suggests anything of the kind? Hovstad. I am of humble origin, as you know; and that has given me opportunities of knowing what is the most crying need in the humbler ranks of life. It is that they should be allowed some part in the direction of public affairs, Doctor. That is what will develop their faculties and intelligence and self respect-- Dr. Stockmann. I quite appreciate that. Hovstad. Yes--and in my opinion a journalist incurs a heavy responsibility if he neglects a favourable opportunity of emancipating the masses--the humble and oppressed. I know well enough that in exalted circles I shall be called an agitator, and all that sort of thing; but they may call what they like. If only my conscience doesn't reproach me, then-- Dr. Stockmann. Quite right! Quite right, Mr. Hovstad. But all the same--devil take it! (A knock is heard at the door.) Come in! (ASLAKSEN appears at the door. He is poorly but decently dressed, in black, with a slightly crumpled white neckcloth; he wears gloves and has a felt hat in his hand.) Aslaksen (bowing). Excuse my taking the liberty, Doctor-- Dr. Stockmann (getting up). Ah, it is you, Aslaksen! Aslaksen. Yes, Doctor. Hovstad (standing up). Is it me you want, Aslaksen? Aslaksen. No; I didn't know I should find you here. No, it was the Doctor I-- Dr. Stockmann. I am quite at your service. What is it? Aslaksen. Is what I heard from Mr. Billing true, sir--that you mean to improve our water supply? Dr. Stockmann. Yes, for the Baths. Aslaksen. Quite so, I understand. Well, I have come to say that I will back that up by every means in my power. Hovstad (to the DOCTOR). You see! Dr. Stockmann. I shall be very grateful to you, but-- Aslaksen. Because it may be no bad thing to have us small tradesmen at your back. We form, as it were, a compact majority in the town--if we choose. And it is always a good thing to have the majority with you, Doctor. Dr. Stockmann. That is undeniably true; but I confess I don't see why such unusual precautions should be necessary in this case. It seems to me that such a plain, straightforward thing-- Aslaksen. Oh, it may be very desirable, all the same. I know our local authorities so well; officials are not generally very ready to act on proposals that come from other people. That is why I think it would not be at all amiss if we made a little demonstration. Hovstad. That's right. Dr. Stockmann. Demonstration, did you say? What on earth are you going to make a demonstration about? Aslaksen. We shall proceed with the greatest moderation, Doctor. Moderation is always my aim; it is the greatest virtue in a citizen--at least, I think so. Dr. Stockmann. It is well known to be a characteristic of yours, Mr. Aslaksen. Aslaksen. Yes, I think I may pride myself on that. And this matter of the water supply is of the greatest importance to us small tradesmen. The Baths promise to be a regular gold-mine for the town. We shall all make our living out of them, especially those of us who are householders. That is why we will back up the project as strongly as possible. And as I am at present Chairman of the Householders' Association. Dr. Stockmann. Yes--? Aslaksen. And, what is more, local secretary of the Temperance Society--you know, sir, I suppose, that I am a worker in the temperance cause? Dr. Stockmann. Of course, of course. Aslaksen. Well, you can understand that I come into contact with a great many people. And as I have the reputation of a temperate and law-abiding citizen--like yourself, Doctor--I have a certain influence in the town, a little bit of power, if I may be allowed to say so. Dr. Stockmann. I know that quite well, Mr. Aslaksen. Aslaksen. So you see it would be an easy matter for me to set on foot some testimonial, if necessary. Dr. Stockmann. A testimonial? Aslaksen. Yes, some kind of an address of thanks from the townsmen for your share in a matter of such importance to the community. I need 