Tree" should sail tomorrow? Bernick: Certainly; I thought that was quite settled. Vigeland: Well, the captain came to me just now and told me that storm signals have been hoisted. Bernick: Oh! Are we to expect a storm? Vigeland: A stiff breeze, at all events; but not a contrary wind--just the opposite. Bernick: Hm--well, what do you say? Vigeland: I say, as I said to the captain, that the "Palm Tree" is in the hands of Providence. Besides, they are only going across the North Sea at first; and in England, freights are running tolerably high just now, so that-- Bernick: Yes, it would probably mean a loss for us if we waited. Vigeland: Besides, she is a stout ship, and fully insured as well. It is more risky, now, for the "Indian Girl"-- Bernick: What do you mean? Vigeland: She sails tomorrow, too. Bernick: Yes, the owners have been in such a hurry, and, besides-- Vigeland: Well, if that old hulk can venture out--and with such a crew, into the bargain--it would be a disgrace to us if we-- Bernick: Quite so. I presume you have the ship's papers with you. Vigeland: Yes, here they are. Bernick: Good; then will you go in with Mr. Krap? Krap: Will you come in here, sir, and we will dispose of them at once. Vigeland: Thank you.--And the issue we leave in the hands of the Almighty, Mr. Bernick. (Goes with KRAP into BERNICK'S room. RORLUND comes up from the garden.) Rorlund: At home at this time of day, Mr. Bernick? Bernick (lost in thought): As you see. Rorlund: It was really on your wife's account I came. I thought she might be in need of a word of comfort. Bernick: Very likely she is. But I want to have a little talk with you, too. Rorlund: With the greatest of pleasure, Mr. Bernick. But what is the matter with you? You look quite pale and upset. Bernick: Really? Do I? Well, what else could you expect--a man so loaded with responsibilities as I am? There is all my own big business--and now the planning of this railway.--But tell me something, Mr. Rorlund, let me put a question to you. Rorlund: With pleasure, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: It is about a thought that has occurred to me. Suppose a man is face to face with an undertaking which will concern the welfare of thousands, and suppose it should be necessary to make a sacrifice of one--? Rorlund: What do you mean? Bernick: For example, suppose a man were thinking of starting a large factory. He knows for certain--because all his experience has taught him so--that sooner or later a toll of human life will be exacted in the working of that factory. Rorlund: Yes, that is only too probable. Bernick: Or, say a man embarks on a mining enterprise. He takes into his service fathers of families and young men in the first flush of their youth. Is it not quite safe to predict that all of them will not come out of it alive? Rorlund: Yes, unhappily that is quite true. Bernick: Well--a man in that position will know beforehand that the undertaking he proposes to start must undoubtedly, at some time or other, mean a loss of human life. But the undertaking itself is for the public good; for every man's life that it costs, it will undoubtedly promote the welfare of many hundreds. Rorlund: Ah, you are thinking of the railway--of all the dangerous excavating and blasting, and that sort of thing-- Bernick: Yes--quite so--I am thinking of the railway. And, besides, the coming of the railway will mean the starting of factories and mines. But do not think, nevertheless-- Rorlund: My dear Mr. Bernick, you are almost over-conscientious. What I think is that, if you place the affair in the hands of Providence-- Bernick: Yes--exactly; Providence-- Rorlund: You are blameless in the matter. Go on and build your railway hopefully. Bernick: Yes, but now I will put a special instance to you. Suppose a charge of blasting-powder had to be exploded in a dangerous place, and that unless it were exploded the line could not be constructed? Suppose the engineer knew that it would cost the life of the workman who lit the fuse, but that it had to be lit, and that it was the engineer's duty to send a workman to do it? Rorlund: Hm-- Bernick: I know what you will say. It would be a splendid thing if the engineer took the match himself and went and lit the fuse. But that is out of the question, so he must sacrifice a workman. Rorlund: That is a thing no engineer here would ever do. Bernick: No engineer in the bigger countries would think twice about doing it. Rorlund: In the bigger countries? No, I can quite believe it. In those depraved and unprincipled communities. Bernick: Oh, there is a good deal to be said for those communities. Rorlund: Can you say that?--you, who yourself-- Bernick: In the bigger communities a man finds space to carry out a valuable project--finds the courage to make some sacrifice in a great cause; but here, a man is cramped by all kinds of petty considerations and scruples. Rorlund: Is human life a petty consideration? Bernick: When that human life threatens the welfare of thousands. 