 Rorlund: But you are suggesting cases that are quite inconceivable, Mr. Bernick! I do not understand you at all today. And you quote the bigger countries--well, what do they think of human life there? They look upon it simply as part of the capital they have to use. But we look at things from a somewhat different moral standpoint, I should hope. Look at our respected shipping industry! Can you name a single one of our ship-owners who would sacrifice a human life for the sake of paltry gain? And then think of those scoundrels in the bigger countries, who for the sake of profit send out freights in one unseaworthy ship after another-- Bernick: I am not talking of unseaworthy ships! Rorlund: But I am, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: Yes, but to what purpose? They have nothing to do with the question--Oh, these small, timid considerations! If a General from this country were to take his men under fire and some of them were shot, I suppose he would have sleepless nights after it! It is not so in other countries. You should bear what that fellow in there says-- Rorlund: He? Who? The American--? Bernick: Yes. You should hear how in America-- Rorlund: He, in there? And you did not tell me? I shall at once-- Bernick: It is no use; you won't be able to do anything with him. Rorlund: We shall see. Ah, here he comes. (JOHAN comes in from the other room.) Johan (talking back through the open door): Yes, yes, Dina--as you please; but I do not mean to give you up, all the same. I shall come back, and then everything will come right between us. Rorlund: Excuse me, but what did you mean by that? What is it you propose to do? Johan: I propose that that young girl, before whom you blackened my character yesterday, shall become my wife. Rorlund: Your wife? And can you really suppose that--? Johan: I mean to marry her. Rorlund: Well, then you shall know the truth. (Goes to the half-open door.) Mrs. Bernick, will you be so kind as to come and be a witness--and you too, Miss Martha. And let Dina come. (Sees LONA at the door.) Ah, you here too? Lona: Shall I come too? Rorlund: As many as you please--the more the better. Bernick: What are you going to do? (LONA, MRS. BERNICK, MARTHA, DINA and HILMAR come in from the other room.) Mrs. Bernick: Mr. Rorlund, I have tried my hardest, but I cannot prevent him... Rorlund: I shall prevent him, Mrs. Bernick. Dina, you are a thoughtless girl, but I do not blame you so greatly. You have too long lacked the necessary moral support that should have sustained you. I blame myself for not having afforded you that support. Dina: You mustn't speak now! Mrs. Bernick: What is it? Rorlund: It is now that I must speak, Dina, although your conduct yesterday and today has made it ten times more difficult for me. But all other considerations must give way to the necessity for saving you. You remember that I gave you my word; you remember what you promised you would answer when I judged that the right time had come. Now I dare not hesitate any longer, and therefore--. (Turns to JOHAN.) This young girl, whom you are persecuting, is my betrothed. Mrs. Bernick: What? Bernick: Dina! Johan: She? Your--? Martha: No, no, Dina! Lona: It is a lie! Johan: Dina--is this man speaking the truth? Dina (after a short pause): Yes. Rorlund: I hope this has rendered all your arts of seduction powerless. The step I have determined to take for Dina's good, I now wish openly proclaimed to every one. I cherish the certain hope that it will not be misinterpreted. And now, Mrs. Bernick, I think it will be best for us to take her away from here, and try to bring back peace and tranquillity to her mind. Mrs. Bernick: Yes, come with me. Oh, Dina--what a lucky girl you are! (Takes DINA Out to the left; RORLUND follows them.) Martha: Good-bye, Johan! (Goes out.) Hilmar (at the verandah door): Hm--I really must say... Lona (who has followed DINA with her eyes, to JOHAN): Don't be downhearted, my boy! I shall stay here and keep my eye on the parson. (Goes out to the right.) Bernick: Johan, you won't sail in the "Indian Girl" now? Johan: Indeed I shall. Bernick: But you won't come back? Johan: I am coming back. Bernick: After this? What have you to do here after this? Johan: Revenge myself on you all; crush as many of you as I can. (Goes out to the right. VIGELAND and KRAP come in from BERNICK'S room.) Vigeland: There, now the papers are in order, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: Good, good. Krap (in a low voice): And I suppose it is settled that the "Indian Girl" is to sail tomorrow? Bernick: Yes. (Goes into his room. VIGELAND and KRAP go out to the right. HILMAR is just going after them, when OLAF puts his head carefully out of the door on the left.) Olaf: Uncle! Uncle Hilmar! Hilmar: Ugh, is it you? Why don't you stay upstairs? You know you are confined to the house. Olaf (coming a step or two nearer): Hush! Uncle Hilmar, have you heard the news? Hilmar: Yes, I have heard that you got a thrashing today. Olaf (looking threateningly towards his father's room): He shan't 