 Rosmer. Of course not. It was impossible to doubt it, unfortunately. You remember what I told you of her ungovernable, wild fits of passion--which she expected me to reciprocate. She terrified me! And think how she tortured herself with baseless self-reproaches in the last years of her life! Kroll. Yes, when she knew that she would always be childless. Rosmer. Well, think what it meant--to be perpetually in the clutches of such--agony of mind over a thing that she was not in the slightest degree responsible for--! Are you going to suggest that she was accountable for her actions? Kroll. Hm!--Do you remember whether at that time you had, in the house any books dealing with the purport of marriage--according to the advanced views of to-day? Rosmer. I remember Miss West's lending me a work of the kind. She inherited Dr. West's library, you know. But, my dear Kroll, you surely do not suppose that we were so imprudent as to let the poor sick creature get wind of any such ideas? I can solemnly swear that we were in no way to blame. It was the overwrought nerves of her own brain that were responsible for these frantic aberrations. Kroll. There is one thing, at any rate, that I can tell you now, and that is that your poor tortured and overwrought Beata put an end to her own life in order that yours might be happy--and that you might be free to live as you pleased. Rosmer (starting half up from his chair). What do you mean by that? Kroll. You must listen to me quietly, Rosmer--because now I can speak of it. During the last year of her life she came twice to see me, to tell me what she suffered from her fears and her despair. Rosmer. On that point? Kroll. No. The first time she came she declared that you were on the high road to apostasy--that you were going to desert the faith that your father had taught you. Rosmer (eagerly). What you say is impossible, Kroll!--absolutely impossible! You must be wrong about that. Kroll. Why? Rosmer. Because as long as Beata lived I was still doubting and fighting with myself. And I fought out that fight alone and in the completest secrecy. I do not imagine that even Rebecca-- Kroll. Rebecca? Rosmer. Oh, well--Miss West. I call her Rebecca for the sake of convenience. Kroll. So I have observed. Rosmer. That is why it is so incomprehensible to me that Beata should have had any suspicion of it. Why did she never speak to me about it?--for she never did, by a single word. Kroll. Poor soul--she begged and implored me to speak to you. Rosmer. Then why did you never do so? Kroll. Do you think I had a moment's doubt, at that time, that her mind was unhinged? Such an accusation as that, against a man like you! Well, she came to see me again, about a month later. She seemed calmer then; but, as she was going away, she said: "They may expect to see the White Horse soon at Rosmersholm." Rosmer. Yes, I know--the White Horse. She often used to talk about that. Kroll. And then, when I tried to distract her from such unhappy thoughts, she only answered: "I have not much time left; for John must marry Rebecca immediately now." Rosmer (almost speechless). What are you saying! I marry--! Kroll. That was on a Thursday afternoon. On the Saturday evening she threw herself from the footbridge into the millrace. Rosmer. And you never warned us! Kroll. Well, you know yourself how constantly she used to say that she was sure she would die before long. Rosmer. Yes, I know. But, all the same, you ought to have warned us! Kroll. I did think of doing so. But then it was too late. Rosmer. But since then, why have you not--? Why have you kept all this to yourself? Kroll. What good would it have done for me to come here and add to your pain and distress? Of course I thought the whole thing was merely wild, empty fancy--until yesterday evening. Rosmer. Then you do not think so any longer? Kroll. Did not Beata see clearly enough, when she saw that you were going to fall away from your childhood's faith? Rosmer (staring in front of him). Yes, I cannot understand that. It is the most incomprehensible thing in the world to me. Kroll. Incomprehensible or not, the thing is true. And now I ask you, Rosmer, how much truth is there in her other accusation?--the last one, I mean. Rosmer. Accusation? Was that an accusation, then? Kroll. Perhaps you did not notice how it was worded. She said she meant to stand out of the way. Why? Well? Rosmer. In order that I might marry Rebecca, apparently. Kroll. That was not quite how it was worded. Beata expressed herself differently. She said "I have not much time left; for John must marry Rebecca IMMEDIATELY now." Rosmer (looks at him for a moment; then gets up). Now I understand you, Kroll. Kroll. And if you do? What answer have you to make? Rosmer (in an even voice, controlling himself). To such an unheard-of--? The only fitting answer would be to point to the door. Kroll (getting up). Very good. Rosmer (standing face to face with him). Listen to me. For considerably 