But you are not listening to me. Bernick: Yes--indeed I am. But, tell me, do you think there is a very heavy sea running outside? Rummel: Why, are you nervous about the "Palm Tree"? She is fully insured, you know. Bernick: Yes, she is insured; but-- Rummel: And in good repair--and that is the main thing. Bernick: Hm--. Supposing anything does happen to a ship, it doesn't follow that human life will be in danger, does it? The ship and the cargo may be lost--and one might lose one's boxes and papers-- Rummel: Good Lord--boxes and papers are not of much consequence. Bernick: Not of much consequence! No, no; I only meant--. Hush--I hear voices again. Rummel: It is on board the "Palm Tree." (VIGELAND comes in from the right.) Vigeland: Yes, they are just towing the "Palm Tree" out. Good evening, Mr. Bernick. Bernick: And you, as a seafaring man, are still of opinion that-- Vigeland: I put my trust in Providence, Mr. Bernick. Moreover, I have been on board myself and distributed a few small tracts which I hope may carry a blessing with them. (SANDSTAD and KRAP come in from the right.) Sandstad (to some one at the door): Well, if that gets through all right, anything will. (Comes in.) Ah, good evening, good evening! Bernick: Is anything the matter, Krap? Krap: I say nothing, Mr. Bernick. Sandstad: The entire crew of the "Indian Girl" are drunk; I will stake my reputation on it that they won't come out of it alive. (LONA comes in from the right.) Lona: Ah, now I can say his good-byes for him. Bernick: Is he on board already? Lona: He will be directly, at any rate. We parted outside the hotel. Bernick: And he persists in his intention? Lona: As firm as a rock. Rummel (who is fumbling at the window): Confound these new-fangled contrivances; I cannot get the curtains drawn. Lona: Do you want them drawn? I thought, on the contrary-- Rummel: Yes, drawn at first, Miss Hessel. You know what is in the wind, I suppose? Lona: Yes. Let me help you. (Takes hold of the cords.) I will draw down the curtains on my brother-in-law--though I would much rather draw them up. Rummel: You can do that too, later on. When the garden is filled with a surging crowd, then the curtains shall be drawn back, and they will be able to look in upon a surprised and happy family. Citizens' lives should be such that they can live in glass houses! (BERNICK opens his mouth, as though he were going to say something; but he turns hurriedly away and goes into his room.) Rummel: Come along, let us have a final consultation. Come in, too, Mr. Krap; you must assist us with information on one or two points of detail. (All the men go into BERNICK'S room. LONA has drawn the curtains over the windows, and is just going to do the same over the open glass door, when OLAF jumps down from the room above on to the garden steps; he has a wrap over his shoulders and a bundle in his hand.) Lona: Bless me, child, how you frightened me! Olaf (hiding his bundle): Hush, aunt! Lona: Did you jump out of the window? Where are you going? Olaf: Hush!--don't say anything. I want to go to Uncle Johan--only on to the quay, you know--only to say goodbye to him. Good-night, aunt! (Runs out through the garden.) Lona: No--stop! Olaf--Olaf! (JOHAN, dressed for his journey, with a bag over his shoulder, comes warily in by the door on the right.) Johan: Lona! Lona (turning round): What! Back again? Johan: I have still a few minutes. I must see her once more; we cannot part like this. (The farther door on the left opens, and MARTHA and DINA, both with cloaks on, and the latter carrying a small travelling bag in her hand, come in.) Dina: Let me go to him! Let me go to him! Martha: Yes, you shall go to him, Dina! Dina: There he is! Johan: Dina! Dina: Take me with you! Johan: What--! Lona: You mean it? Dina: Yes, take me with you. The other has written to me that he means to announce to everyone this evening. Johan: Dina--you do not love him? Dina: I have never loved the man! I would rather drown myself in the fjord than be engaged to him! Oh, how he humiliated me yesterday with his condescending manner! How clear he made it that he felt he was lifting up a poor despised creature to his own level! I do not mean to be despised any longer. I mean to go away. May I go with you? Johan: Yes, yes--a thousand times, yes! Dina: I will not be a burden to you long. Only help me to get over there; help me to go the right way about things at first. Johan: Hurrah, it is all right after all, Dina! Lona (pointing to BERNICK'S door): Hush!--gently, gently! Johan: Dina, I shall look after you. Dina: I am not going to let you do that. I mean to look after myself; over there, I am sure I can do that. Only let me get away from here. Oh, these women!--you don't know--they have written to me today, too--exhorting me to realise my good fortune--impressing on me how magnanimous he has been. Tomorrow, and every day afterwards, they would be watching me to see if I were making myself worthy of it all. I am 