more than a year to be precise, since Beata's death--Rebecca West and I have lived here alone at Rosmersholm. All that time you have known of the charge Beata made against us; but I have never for one moment seen you appear the least scandalised at our living together here. Kroll. I never knew, till yesterday evening, that it was a case of an apostate man and an "emancipated" woman living together. Rosmer. Ah! So then you do not believe in any purity of life among apostates or emancipated folk? You do not believe that they may have the instinct of morality ingrained in their natures? Kroll. I have no particular confidence in the kind of morality that is not rooted in the Church's faith. Rosmer. And you mean that to apply to Rebecca and myself?--to my relations with Rebecca? Kroll. I cannot make any departure, in favour of you two, from my opinion that there is certainly no very wide gulf between free thinking and--ahem! Rosmer. And what? Kroll. And free love, since you force me to say it. Rosmer (gently). And you are not ashamed to say that to me!--you, who have known me ever since I was a boy. Kroll. It is just for that reason. I know how easily you allow yourself to be influenced by those you associate with. And as for your Rebecca--well, your Miss West, then--to tell the truth, we know very little about her. To cut the matter short, Rosmer--I am not going to give you up. And you, on your part, ought to try and save yourself in time. Rosmer. Save myself? How--? (MRS. HELSETH looks in through the door on the left.) What do you want? Mrs. Helseth. I wanted to ask Miss West to come down, sir. Rosmer. Miss West is not up here. Mrs. Helseth. Indeed, sir? (Looks round the room.) That is very strange. (Goes out.) Rosmer. You were saying--? Kroll. Listen to me. As to what may have gone on here in secret while Beata was alive, and as to what may be still going on here, I have no wish to inquire more closely. You were, of course, extremely unhappy in your marriage--and to some extent that may be urged in your excuse-- Rosmer. Oh, how little you really know me! Kroll. Do not interrupt me. What I want to say is this. If you definitely must continue living with Miss West, it is absolutely necessary that you should conceal the revolution of opinion--I mean the distressing apostasy--that she has beguiled you into. Let me speak! Let me speak! I say that, if you are determined to go on with this folly, for heaven's sake hold any variety of ideas or opinions or beliefs you like--but keep your opinions to yourself. It is a purely personal matter, and there is not the slightest necessity to go proclaiming it all over the countryside. Rosmer. It is a necessity for me to abandon a false and equivocal position. Kroll. But you have a duty towards the traditions of your family, Rosmer! Remember that! From time immemorial Rosmersholm has been a stronghold of discipline and order, of respect and esteem for all that the best people in our community have upheld and sanctioned. The whole neighbourhood has taken its tone from Rosmersholm. If the report gets about that you yourself have broken with what I may call the Rosmer family tradition, it will evoke an irreparable state of unrest. Rosmer. My dear Kroll, I cannot see the matter in that light. It seems to me that it is my imperative duty to bring a little light and happiness into the place where the race of Rosmers has spread darkness and oppression for all these long years. Kroll (looking severely at him). Yes, that would be a worthy action for the man with whom the race will disappear. Let such things alone, my friend. It is no suitable task for you. You were meant to lead the peaceful life of a student. Rosmer. Yes, that may be so. But nevertheless I want to try and play my humble part in the struggles of life. Kroll. The struggles of life! Do you know what that will mean for you? It will mean war to the death with all your friends. Rosmer (quietly). I do not imagine they are all such fanatics as you. Kroll. You are a simple-minded creature, Rosmer--an inexperienced creature. You have no suspicion of the violence of the storm that will burst upon you. (MRS. HELSETH slightly opens the door on the left.) Mrs. Helseth. Miss West wishes me to ask you, sir Rosmer. What is it? Mrs. Helseth. There is some one downstairs that wishes to speak to you for a minute, sir. Rosmer. Is it the gentleman that was here yesterday afternoon, by any chance? Mrs. Helseth. No, it is that Mr. Mortensgaard. Rosmer. Mortensgaard? Kroll. Aha! So matters have got as far as that already, have they! Rosmer. What does he want with me? Why did you not send him away? Mrs. Helseth. Miss West told me to ask you if he might come up. Rosmer. Tell him I am engaged, and-- Kroll (to MRS. HELSETH). No; show him up, please. (MRS. HELSETH goes out. KROLL takes up his hat.) I quit the field--temporarily. But we have not fought the decisive action yet. Rosmer. As truly as I stand here, Kroll, I have absolutely nothing to 