 Rummel: No, no, you must come yourself. Naturally, no one would dare to suspect you of such duplicity. Lona: I should think not. Bernick: I cannot, I tell you; I am not well. Or, at all events, wait--let me pull myself together. (RORLUND comes in from the right.) Rorlund: Excuse me, Mr. Bernick, but I am terribly upset. Bernick: Why, what is the matter with you? Rorlund. I must put a question to you, Mr. Bernick. Is it with your consent that the young girl who has found a shelter under your roof shows herself in the open street in the company of a person who-- Lona: What person, Mr. Parson? Rorlund: With the person from whom, of all others in the world, she ought to be kept farthest apart! Lona: Ha! ha! Rorlund: Is it with your consent, Mr. Bernick? Bernick (looking for his hat and gloves). I know nothing about it. You must excuse me; I am in a great hurry. I am due at the Commercial Association. (HILMAR comes up from the garden and goes over to the farther door on the left.) Hilmar: Betty--Betty, I want to speak to you. Mrs. Bernick (coming to the door): What is it? Hilmar: You ought to go down into the garden and put a stop to the flirtation that is going on between a certain person and Dina Dorf! It has quite got on my nerves to listen to them. Lona: Indeed! And what has the certain person been saying? Hilmar: Oh, only that he wishes she would go off to America with him. Ugh! Rorlund: Is it possible? Mrs. Bernick: What do you say? Lona: But that would be perfectly splendid! Bernick: Impossible! You cannot have heard right. Hilmar: Ask him yourself, then. Here comes the pair of them. Only, leave me out of it, please. Bernick (to RUMMEL and VIGELAND): I will follow you--in a moment. (RUMMEL and VIGELAND go out to the right. JOHAN and DINA come up from the garden.) Johan: Hurrah, Lona, she is going with us! Mrs. Bernick: But, Johan--are you out of your senses? Rorlund: Can I believe my ears! Such an atrocious scandal! By what arts of seduction have you--? Johan: Come, come, sir--what are you saying? Rorlund: Answer me, Dina; do you mean to do this--entirely of your own free will? Dina: I must get away from here. Rorlund: But with him!--with him! Dina: Can you tell me of any one else here who would have the courage to take me with him? Rorlund: Very well, then--you shall learn who he is. Johan: Do not speak! Bernick: Not a word more! Rorlund: If I did not, I should be unworthy to serve a community of whose morals I have been appointed a guardian, and should be acting most unjustifiably towards this young girl, in whose upbringing I have taken a material part, and who is to me-- Johan: Take care what you are doing! Rorlund: She shall know! Dina, this is the man who was the cause of all your mother's misery and shame. Bernick: Mr. Rorlund--? Dina: He! (TO JOHAN.) Is this true? Johan: Karsten, you answer. Bernick: Not a word more! Do not let us say another word about it today. Dina: Then it is true. Rorlund: Yes, it is true. And more than that, this fellow--whom you were going to trust--did not run away from home empty-handed; ask him about old Mrs. Bernick's cash-box.... Mr. Bernick can bear witness to that! Lona: Liar Bernick: Ah! Mrs. Bernick: My God! my God! Johan (rushing at RORLUND with uplifted arm): And you dare to-- Lona (restraining him): Do not strike him, Johan! Rorlund: That is right, assault me! But the truth will out; and it is the truth--Mr. Bernick has admitted it--and the whole town knows it. Now, Dina, you know him. (A short silence.) Johan (softly, grasping BERNICK by the arm): Karsten, Karsten, what have you done? Mrs. Bernick (in tears): Oh, Karsten, to think that I should have mixed you up in all this disgrace! Sandstad (coming in hurriedly from the right, and calling out, with his hand still on the door-handle): You positively must come now, Mr. Bernick. The fate of the whole railway is hanging by a thread. Bernick (abstractedly): What is it? What have I to-- Lona (earnestly and with emphasis): You have to go and be a pillar of society, brother-in-law. Sandstad: Yes, come along; we need the full weight of your moral excellence on our side. Johan (aside, to BERNICK): Karsten, we will have a talk about this tomorrow. (Goes out through the garden. BERNICK, looking half dazed, goes out to the right with SANDSTAD.) ACT III (SCENE--The same room. BERNICK, with a cane in his hand and evidently in a great rage, comes out of the farther room on the left, leaving the door half-open behind him.) Bernick (speaking to his wife, who is in the other room): There! I have given it him in earnest now; I don't think he will forget that thrashing! What do you say?--And I say that you are an injudicious mother! You make excuses for him, and countenance any sort of rascality on his part--Not rascality? What do you call it, then? Slipping out of the house at night, going out in a fishing boat, staying away till well on in the day, and giving me such a horrible fright when I have so much 