 Rebecca. Then you have completely forgotten that it was Beata that begged and entreated me to come and live here. Kroll. Yes, because you had bewitched her too. Are you going to pretend that friendship is the name for what she came to feel towards you? It was idolatry--adoration. It degenerated into a--what shall I call, it?--a sort of desperate passion. Yes, that is just the word for it. Rebecca. Have the goodness to remember the condition your sister was in. As far as I am concerned I do not think I can be said to be particularly emotional in any way. Kroll. No, you certainly are not. But that makes you all the more dangerous to those whom you wish to get into your power. It comes easy to you to act with deliberation and careful calculation, just because you have a cold heart. Rebecca. Cold? Are you so sure of that? Kroll. I am certain of it now. Otherwise you could not have pursued your object here so unswervingly, year after year. Yes, yes--you have gained what you wanted. You have got him and everything else here into your power. But, to carry out your schemes, you have not scrupled to make him unhappy. Rebecca. That is not true. It is not I; it is you yourself that have made him unhappy. Kroll. I! Rebecca. Yes, by leading him to imagine that he was responsible for the terrible end that overtook Beata. Kroll. Did that affect him so deeply, then? Rebecca. Of course. A man of such gentle disposition as he-- Kroll. I imagined that one of your so-called "emancipated" men would know how to overcome any scruples. But there it is! Oh, yes--as a matter of fact it turned out just as I expected. The descendant of the men who are looking at us from these walls need not think he can break loose from what has been handed down as an inviolable inheritance from generation to generation. Rebecca (looking thoughtfully in front of her). John Rosmer's nature is deeply rooted in his ancestors. That is certainly very true. Kroll. Yes, and you ought to have taken that into consideration, if you had had any sympathy for him. But I dare say you were incapable of that sort of consideration. Your starting-point is so very widely-removed from his, you see. Rebecca. What do you mean by my starting-point? Kroll. I mean the starting-point of origin--of parentage, Miss West. Rebecca. I see. Yes, it is quite true that my origin is very humble. But nevertheless-- Kroll. I am not alluding to rank or position. I am thinking of the moral aspect of your origin. Rebecca. Of my origin? In what respect? Kroll. In respect of your birth generally. Rebecca. What are you saying! Kroll. I am only saying it because it explains the whole of your conduct. Rebecca. I do not understand. Be so good as to tell me exactly what you mean. Kroll. I really thought you did not need telling. Otherwise it would seem a very strange thing that you let yourself be adopted by Dr. West. Rebecca (getting up). Oh, that is it! Now I understand. Kroll. And took his name. Your mother's name was Gamvik. Rebecca (crossing the room). My father's name was Gamvik, Mr. Kroll. Kroll. Your mother's occupation must, of course, have brought her continually into contact with the district physician. Rebecca. You are quite right. Kroll. And then he takes you to live with him, immediately upon your mother's death. He treats you harshly, and yet you stay with him. You know that he will not leave you a single penny--as a matter of fact you only got a box of books--and yet you endure living with him, put up with his behaviour, and nurse him to the end. Rebecca (comes to the table and looks at him scornfully). And my doing all that makes it clear to you that there was something immoral--something criminal about my birth! Kroll. What you did for him, I attributed to an unconscious filial instinct. And, as far as the rest of it goes, I consider that the whole of your conduct has been the outcome of your origin. Rebecca (hotly). But there is not a single word of truth in what you say! And I can prove it! Dr. West had not come to Finmark when I was born. Kroll. Excuse me, Miss West. He went there a year before you were born. I have ascertained that. Rebecca. You are mistaken, I tell you! You are absolutely mistaken! Kroll. You said here, the day before yesterday, that you were twenty-nine--going on for thirty. Rebecca. Really? Did I say that? Kroll. Yes, you did. And from that I can calculate-- Rebecca. Stop! That will not help you to calculate. For, I may as well tell you at once, I am a year older than I give myself out to be. Kroll (smiling incredulously). Really? That is something new. How is that? Rebecca. When I had passed my twenty-fifth birthday, I thought I was getting altogether too old for an unmarried girl, so I resolved to tell a lie and take a year off my age. Kroll. You--an emancipated woman--cherishing prejudices as to the marriageable age! Rebecca. I know it was a silly thing to do--and ridiculous, too. But every one has some prejudice or another that they cannot get quite rid 