 Dr. Stockmann. Bravely said, Katherine! It shall be made public--as I am a living soul! If I can't hire a hall, I shall hire a drum, and parade the town with it and read it at every street-corner. Peter Stockmann. You are surely not such an errant fool as that! Dr. Stockmann. Yes, I am. Aslaksen. You won't find a single man in the whole town to go with you. Billing. No, I'm damned if you will. Mrs. Stockmann. Don't give in, Thomas. I will tell the boys to go with you. Dr. Stockmann. That is a splendid idea! Mrs. Stockmann. Morten will be delighted; and Ejlif will do whatever he does. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, and Petra!--and you too, Katherine! Mrs. Stockmann. No, I won't do that; but I will stand at the window and watch you, that's what I will do. Dr. Stockmann (puts his arms round her and kisses her). Thank you, my dear! Now you and I are going to try a fall, my fine gentlemen! I am going to see whether a pack of cowards can succeed in gagging a patriot who wants to purify society! (He and his wife go out by the street door.) Peter Stockmann (shaking his head seriously). Now he has sent her out of her senses, too. ACT IV (SCENE.--A big old-fashioned room in CAPTAIN HORSTER'S house. At the back folding-doors, which are standing open, lead to an ante-room. Three windows in the left-hand wall. In the middle of the opposite wall a platform has been erected. On this is a small table with two candles, a water-bottle and glass, and a bell. The room is lit by lamps placed between the windows. In the foreground on the left there is a table with candles and a chair. To the right is a door and some chairs standing near it. The room is nearly filled with a crowd of townspeople of all sorts, a few women and schoolboys being amongst them. People are still streaming in from the back, and the room is soon filled.) 1st Citizen (meeting another). Hullo, Lamstad! You here too? 2nd Citizen. I go to every public meeting, I do. 3rd Citizen. Brought your whistle too, I expect! 2nd Citizen. I should think so. Haven't you? 3rd Citizen. Rather! And old Evensen said he was going to bring a cow-horn, he did. 2nd Citizen. Good old Evensen! (Laughter among the crowd.) 4th Citizen (coming up to them). I say, tell me what is going on here tonight? 2nd Citizen. Dr. Stockmann is going to deliver an address attacking the Mayor. 4th Citizen. But the Mayor is his brother. 1st Citizen. That doesn't matter; Dr. Stockmann's not the chap to be afraid. Peter Stockmann. For various reasons, which you will easily understand, I must beg to be excused. But fortunately we have amongst us a man who I think will be acceptable to you all. I refer to the President of the Householders' Association, Mr. Aslaksen. Several voices. Yes--Aslaksen! Bravo Aslaksen! (DR. STOCKMANN takes up his MS. and walks up and down the platform.) Aslaksen. Since my fellow-citizens choose to entrust me with this duty, I cannot refuse. (Loud applause. ASLAKSEN mounts the platform.) Billing (writing), "Mr. Aslaksen was elected with enthusiasm." Aslaksen. And now, as I am in this position, I should like to say a few brief words. I am a quiet and peaceable man, who believes in discreet moderation, and--and--in moderate discretion. All my friends can bear witness to that. Several Voices. That's right! That's right, Aslaksen! Aslaksen. I have learned in the school of life and experience that moderation is the most valuable virtue a citizen can possess-- Peter Stockmann. Hear, hear! Aslaksen. --And moreover, that discretion and moderation are what enable a man to be of most service to the community. I would therefore suggest to our esteemed fellow-citizen, who has called this meeting, that he should strive to keep strictly within the bounds of moderation. A Man by the door. Three cheers for the Moderation Society! A Voice. Shame! Several Voices. Sh!-Sh! Aslaksen. No interruptions, gentlemen, please! Does anyone wish to make any remarks? Peter Stockmann. Mr. Chairman. Aslaksen. The Mayor will address the meeting. Peter Stockmann. In consideration of the close relationship in which, as you all know, I stand to the present Medical Officer of the Baths, I should have preferred not to speak this evening. But my official position with regard to the Baths and my solicitude for the vital interests of the town compel me to bring forward a motion. I venture to presume that there is not a single one of our citizens present who considers it desirable that unreliable and exaggerated accounts of the sanitary condition of the Baths and the town should be spread abroad. Several Voices. No, no! Certainly not! We protest against it! Peter Stockmann. Therefore, I should like to propose that the meeting should not permit the Medical Officer either to read or to comment on his proposed lecture. Dr. Stockmann (impatiently). Not permit--! What the devil--! Mrs. Stockmann (coughing). Ahem!-ahem! Dr. Stockmann (collecting himself). Very well, Go ahead! Peter Stockmann. In my communication to the "People's Messenger," I 