the public, the crowd, the masses, are the essential part of the population--that they constitute the People--that the common folk, the ignorant and incomplete element in the community, have the same right to pronounce judgment and to approve, to direct and to govern, as the isolated, intellectually superior personalities in it. Billing. Well, damn me if ever I-- Hovstad (at the same time, shouting out). Fellow-citizens, take good note of that! A number of voices (angrily). Oho!--we are not the People! Only the superior folk are to govern, are they! A Workman. Turn the fellow out for talking such rubbish! Another. Out with him! Another (calling out). Blow your horn, Evensen! (A horn is blown loudly, amidst hisses and an angry uproar.) Dr. Stockmann (when the noise has somewhat abated). Be reasonable! Can't you stand hearing the voice of truth for once? I don't in the least expect you to agree with me all at once; but I must say I did expect Mr. Hovstad to admit I was right, when he had recovered his composure a little. He claims to be a freethinker-- Voices (in murmurs of astonishment). Freethinker, did he say? Is Hovstad a freethinker? Hovstad (shouting). Prove it, Dr. Stockmann! When have I said so in print? Dr. Stockmann (reflecting). No, confound it, you are right!--you have never had the courage to. Well, I won't put you in a hole, Mr. Hovstad. Let us say it is I that am the freethinker, then. I am going to prove to you, scientifically, that the "People's Messenger" leads you by the nose in a shameful manner when it tells you that you--that the common people, the crowd, the masses, are the real essence of the People. That is only a newspaper lie, I tell you! The common people are nothing more than the raw material of which a People is made. (Groans, laughter and uproar.) Well, isn't that the case? Isn't there an enormous difference between a well-bred and an ill-bred strain of animals? Take, for instance, a common barn-door hen. What sort of eating do you get from a shrivelled up old scrag of a fowl like that? Not much, do you! And what sort of eggs does it lay? A fairly good crow or a raven can lay pretty nearly as good an egg. But take a well-bred Spanish or Japanese hen, or a good pheasant or a turkey--then you will see the difference. Or take the case of dogs, with whom we humans are on such intimate terms. Think first of an ordinary common cur--I mean one of the horrible, coarse-haired, low-bred curs that do nothing but run about the streets and befoul the walls of the houses. Compare one of these curs with a poodle whose sires for many generations have been bred in a gentleman's house, where they have had the best of food and had the opportunity of hearing soft voices and music. Do you not think that the poodle's brain is developed to quite a different degree from that of the cur? Of course it is. It is puppies of well-bred poodles like that, that showmen train to do incredibly clever tricks--things that a common cur could never learn to do even if it stood on its head. (Uproar and mocking cries.) A Citizen (calls out). Are you going to make out we are dogs, now? Another Citizen. We are not animals, Doctor! Dr. Stockmann. Yes but, bless my soul, we are, my friend! It is true we are the finest animals anyone could wish for; but, even among us, exceptionally fine animals are rare. There is a tremendous difference between poodle-men and cur-men. And the amusing part of it is, that Mr. Hovstad quite agrees with me as long as it is a question of four-footed animals-- Hovstad. Yes, it is true enough as far as they are concerned. Dr. Stockmann. Very well. But as soon as I extend the principle and apply it to two-legged animals, Mr. Hovstad stops short. He no longer dares to think independently, or to pursue his ideas to their logical conclusion; so, he turns the whole theory upside down and proclaims in the "People's Messenger" that it is the barn-door hens and street curs that are the finest specimens in the menagerie. But that is always the way, as long as a man retains the traces of common origin and has not worked his way up to intellectual distinction. Hovstad. I lay no claim to any sort of distinction, I am the son of humble country-folk, and I am proud that the stock I come from is rooted deep among the common people he insults. Voices. Bravo, Hovstad! Bravo! Bravo! Dr. Stockmann. The kind of common people I mean are not only to be found low down in the social scale; they crawl and swarm all around us--even in the highest social positions. You have only to look at your own fine, distinguished Mayor! My brother Peter is every bit as plebeian as anyone that walks in two shoes-- (laughter and hisses) Peter Stockmann. I protest against personal allusions of this kind. Dr. Stockmann (imperturbably).--and that, not because he is like myself, descended from some old rascal of a pirate from Pomerania or thereabouts--because that is who we are descended from-- Peter Stockmann. An absurd legend. I deny it! 