 Brendel. For five and twenty years I have been like a miser sitting on his locked money-chest. And then to-day, when I opened it to take out my treasure--there was nothing there! The mills of time had ground it into dust. There was not a blessed thing left of the whole lot. Rosmer. But are you certain of that? Brendel. There is no room for doubt, my dear boy. The President has convinced me of that. Rosmer. The President? Brendel. Oh, well--His Excellency, then. Ganz nach Belieben. Rosmer. But whom do you mean? Brendel. Peter Mortensgaard, of course. Rosmer. What! Brendel (mysteriously). Hush, hush, hush! Peter Mortensgaard is Lord and Chieftain of the Future. I have never stood in a more august presence. Peter Mortensgaard has the power of omnipotence in him. He can do whatever he wants. Rosmer. Oh, come--don't you believe that! Brendel. It is true, my boy--because Peter Mortensgaard never wants to do more than he can. Peter Mortensgaard is capable of living his life without ideals. And that, believe me, is precisely the great secret of success in life. It sums up all the wisdom of the world. Basta! Rosmer (in a low voice). Now I see that you are going away from here poorer than you came. Brendel. Bien! Then take an example from your old tutor. Erase from your mind everything that he imprinted there. Do not build your castle upon the shifting sand. And look well ahead, and be sure of your ground, before you build upon the charming creature who is sweetening your life here. Rebecca. Do you mean me? Brendel. Yes, most attractive mermaid! Rebecca. Why am I not fit to build upon? Brendel (taking a step nearer to her). I understood that my former pupil had a cause which it was his life's work to lead to victory. Rebecca. And if he has--? Brendel. He is certain of victory--but, be it distinctly understood, on one unalterable condition. Rebecca. What is that? Brendel (taking her gently by the wrist). That the woman who loves him shall gladly go out into the kitchen and chop off her dainty, pink and white little finger--here, just at the middle joint. Furthermore, that the aforesaid loving woman shall--also gladly--clip off her incomparably moulded left ear. (Lets her go, and turns to ROSMER.) Good-bye, John the Victorious! Rosmer. Must you go now--in this dark night? Brendel. The dark night is best. Peace be with you! (He goes out. Silence in the room for a short time.) Rebecca (breathing heavily). How close and sultry it is in here! (Goes to the window, opens it and stands by it.) Rosmer (sitting down on a chair by the stove). There is nothing else for it after all, Rebecca--I can see that. You must go away. Rebecca. Yes, I do not see that I have any choice. Rosmer. Let us make use of our last hour together. Come over here and sit beside me. Rebecca (goes and sits down on the couch). What do you want, John? Rosmer. In the first place I want to tell you that you need have no anxiety about your future. Rebecca (with a smile). Hm! My future! Rosmer. I have foreseen all contingencies--long ago. Whatever may happen, you are provided for. Rebecca. Have you even done that for me, dear? Rosmer. You might have known that I should. Rebecca. It is many a long day since I thought about anything of the kind. Rosmer. Yes, of course. Naturally, you thought things could never be otherwise between us than as they were. Rebecca. Yes, that was what I thought. Rosmer. So did I. But if anything were to happen to me now-- Rebecca. Oh, John, you will live longer than I shall. Rosmer. I can dispose of my miserable existence as I please, you know. Rebecca. What do you mean? You surely are never thinking of--! Rosmer. Do you think it would be so surprising? After the pitiful, lamentable defeat I have suffered? I, who was to have made it my life's work to lead my cause to victory--! And here I am, a deserter before the fight has even really begun! Rebecca. Take up the fight again, John! Only try--and you will see that you will conquer. You will ennoble hundreds--thousands--of souls. Only try! Rosmer. I, Rebecca, who no longer believe even in my having a mission in life? Rebecca. But your mission has stood the test. You have at all events ennobled one of your fellow-creatures for the rest of her life--I mean myself. Rosmer. Yes--if I dared believe you about that. Rebecca (wringing her hands). But, John, do you know of nothing--nothing--that would make you believe that? Rosmer (starts, as if with fear). Don't venture on that subject! No further, Rebecca! Not a single word more! Rebecca. Indeed, that is just the subject we must venture upon. Do you know of anything that would stifle your doubts? For I know of nothing in the world. Rosmer. It is best for you not to know. Best for us both. Rebecca. No, no, no--I have no patience with that sort of thing! If you know of anything that would acquit me in your eyes, I claim it as my right that you should name it. Rosmer (as if impelled against his will). Well, let us see. You say 