everywhere! Rebecca. Mr. Rosmer is so fond of having fresh flowers about him. Kroll. And so are you, I should say. Rebecca. Yes, I am. I think their scent has such a delicious effect on one--and till lately we had to deny ourselves that pleasure, you know. Kroll (nodding slowly). Poor Beata could not stand the scent of them. Rebecca. Nor their colours either. They made her feel dazed. Kroll. Yes, I remember. (Continues in a more cheerful tone of voice). Well, and how are things going here? Rebecca. Oh, everything goes on in the same quiet, placid way. One day is exactly like another. And how are things with you? Is your wife--? Kroll. Oh, my dear Miss West, don't let us talk about my affairs. In a family there is always something or other going awry--especially in such times as we live in now. Rebecca (after a short pause, sitting down in an easy-chair near the sofa). Why have you never once been near us during the whole of your holidays? Kroll. Oh, it doesn't do to be importunate, you know. Rebecca. If you only knew how we have missed you. Kroll. And, besides, I have been away, you know. Rebecca. Yes, for a fortnight or so. I suppose you have been going the round of the public meetings? Kroll (nods). Yes, what do you say to that? Would you ever have thought I would become a political agitator in my old age--eh? Rebecca (smilingly). You have always been a little bit of an agitator, Mr. Kroll. Kroll. Oh, yes; just for my own amusement. But for the future it is going to be in real earnest. Do you ever read the Radical newspapers? Rebecca. Yes, I won't deny that! Kroll. My dear Miss West, there is no objection to that--not as far as you are concerned. Rebecca. No, that is just what I think. I must follow the course of events--keep up with what is happening. Kroll. Well, under any circumstances, I should never expect you, as a woman, to side actively with either party in the civic dispute--indeed one might more properly call it the civil war--that is raging here. I dare say you have read, then, the abuse these "nature's gentlemen" are pleased to shower upon me, and the scandalous coarseness they consider they are entitled to make use of? Rebecca. Yes, but I think you have held your own pretty forcibly. Kroll. That I have--though I say it. I have tasted blood now, and I will make them realise that I am not the sort of man to take it lying down--. (Checks himself.) No, no, do not let us get upon that sad and distressing topic this evening. Rebecca. No, my dear Mr. Kroll, certainly not. Kroll. Tell me, instead, how you find you get on at Rosmersholm, now that you are alone here--I mean, since our poor Beata-- Rebecca. Oh, thanks--I get on very well here. Her death has made a great gap in the house in many ways, of course--and one misses her and grieves for her, naturally. But in other respects-- Kroll. Do you think you will remain here?--permanently, I mean? Rebecca. Dear Mr. Kroll, I really never think about it at all. The fact is that I have become so thoroughly domesticated here that I almost feel as if I belonged to the place too. Kroll. You? I should think you did! Rebecca. And as long as Mr. Rosmer finds I can be any comfort or any use to him, I will gladly remain here, undoubtedly. Kroll (looking at her, with some emotion). You know, there is something splendid about a woman's sacrificing the whole of her youth for others. Rebecca. What else have I had to live for? Kroll. At first when you came here there was your perpetual worry with that unreasonable cripple of a foster-father of yours-- Rebecca. You mustn't think that Dr. West was as unreasonable as that when we lived in Finmark. It was the trying journeys by sea that broke him up. But it is quite true that after we had moved here there were one or two hard years before his sufferings were over. Kroll. Were not the years that followed even harder for you? Rebecca. No; how can you say such a thing! I, who was so genuinely fond of Beata--! And she, poor soul was so sadly in need of care and sympathetic companionship. Kroll. You deserve to be thanked and rewarded for the forbearance with which you speak of her. Rebecca (moving a little nearer to him). Dear Mr. Kroll, you say that so kindly and so sincerely that I feel sure you really bear me no ill-will. Kroll. Ill-will? What do you mean? Rebecca. Well, it would not be so very surprising if it were rather painful for you to see me, a stranger, doing just as I like here at Rosmersholm. Kroll. How in the world could you think--! Rebecca. Then it is not so? (Holds out her hand to, him.) Thank you, Mr. Kroll; thank you for that. Kroll. But what on earth could make you take such an idea into your head? Rebecca. I began to be afraid it might be so, as you have so seldom been out here to see us lately. Kroll. I can assure you, you have been on the wrong scent entirely, Miss West. And, in any case, the situation of affairs is unchanged in any essential point; because during the last sad years of poor Beata's 