idea--people in the town and the suburbs, and especially the press; but I managed to get the proposal quashed, on the ground that it would have injured our steamboat trade along the coast. Lona: Have you any interest in the steamboat trade? Bernick: Yes. But no one ventured to suspect me on that account; my honoured name fully protected me from that. For the matter of that, I could have stood the loss; but the place could not have stood it. So the inland line was decided upon. As soon as that was done, I assured myself--without saying anything about it--that a branch line could be laid to the town. Lona: Why did you say nothing about it, Karsten? Bernick: Have you heard the rumours of extensive buying up of forest lands, mines and waterfalls--? Johan: Yes, apparently it is some company from another part of the country. Bernick: As these properties are situated at present, they are as good as valueless to their owners, who are scattered about the neighbourhood; they have therefore been sold comparatively cheap. If the purchaser had waited till the branch line began to be talked of, the proprietors would have asked exorbitant prices. Lona: Well--what then? Bernick: Now I am going to tell you something that can be construed in different ways--a thing to which, in our community, a man could only confess provided he had an untarnished and honoured name to take his stand upon. Lona: Well? Bernick: It is I that have bought up the whole of them. Lona: You? Johan: On your own account? Bernick: On my own account. If the branch line becomes an accomplished fact, I am a millionaire; if it does not, I am ruined. Lona: It is a big risk, Karsten. Bernick: I have risked my whole fortune on it. Lona: I am not thinking of your fortune; but if it comes to light that-- Bernick. Yes, that is the critical part of it. With the unblemished and honoured name I have hitherto borne, I can take the whole thing upon my shoulders, carry it through, and say to my fellow-citizens: "See, I have taken this risk for the good of the community." Lona: Of the community? Bernick: Yes; and not a soul will doubt my motives. Lona: Then some of those concerned in it have acted more openly--without any secret motives or considerations. Bernick: Who? Lona: Why, of course, Rummel and Sandstad and Vigeland. Bernick: To get them on my side I was obliged to let them into the secret. Lona: And they? Bernick: They have stipulated for a fifth part of the profits as their share. Lona: Oh, these pillars of society. Bernick: And isn't it society itself that forces us to use these underhanded means? What would have happened if I had not acted secretly? Everybody would have wanted to have a hand in the undertaking; the whole thing would have been divided up, mismanaged and bungled. There is not a single man in the town except myself who is capable of directing so big an affair as this will be. In this country, almost without exception, it is only foreigners who have settled here who have the aptitude for big business schemes. That is the reason why my conscience acquits me in the matter. It is only in my hands that these properties can become a real blessing to the many who have to make their daily bread. Lona: I believe you are right there, Karsten. Johan: But I have no concern with the many, and my life's happiness is at stake. Bernick: The welfare of your native place is also at stake. If things come out which cast reflections on my earlier conduct, then all my opponents will fall upon me with united vigour. A youthful folly is never allowed to be forgotten in our community. They would go through the whole of my previous life, bring up a thousand little incidents in it, interpret and explain them in the light of what has been revealed; they would crush me under the weight of rumours and slanders. I should be obliged to abandon the railway scheme; and, if I take my hand off that, it will come to nothing, and I shall be ruined and my life as a citizen will be over. Lona: Johan, after what we have just heard, you must go away from here and hold your tongue. Bernick: Yes, yes, Johan--you must! Johan: Yes, I will go away, and I will hold my tongue; but I shall come back, and then I shall speak. Bernick: Stay over there, Johan; hold your tongue, and I am willing to share with you-- Johan: Keep your money, but give me back my name and reputation. Bernick: And sacrifice my own! Johan: You and your community must get out of that the best way you can. I must and shall win Dina for my wife. And therefore, I am going to sail tomorrow in the "Indian Girl"-- Bernick: In the "Indian Girl"? Johan: Yes. The captain has promised to take me. I shall go over to America, as I say; I shall sell my farm, and set my affairs in order. In two months I shall be back. Bernick: And then you will speak? Johan: Then the guilty man must take his guilt on himself. Bernick: Have you forgotten that, if I do that, I must also take on myself guilt that is not mine? 