the town he lives in. Dr. Stockmann. It is I who have the real good of the town at heart! I want to lay bare the defects that sooner or later must come to the light of day. I will show whether I love my native town. Peter Stockmann. You, who in your blind obstinacy want to cut off the most important source of the town's welfare? Dr. Stockmann. The source is poisoned, man! Are you mad? We are making our living by retailing filth and corruption! The whole of our flourishing municipal life derives its sustenance from a lie! Peter Stockmann. All imagination--or something even worse. The man who can throw out such offensive insinuations about his native town must be an enemy to our community. Dr. Stockmann (going up to him). Do you dare to--! Mrs. Stockmann (throwing herself between them). Thomas! Petra (catching her father by the arm). Don't lose your temper, father! Peter Stockmann. I will not expose myself to violence. Now you have had a warning; so reflect on what you owe to yourself and your family. Goodbye. (Goes out.) Dr. Stockmann (walking up and down). Am I to put up with such treatment as this? In my own house, Katherine! What do you think of that! Mrs. Stockmann. Indeed it is both shameful and absurd, Thomas-- Petra. If only I could give uncle a piece of my mind-- Dr. Stockmann. It is my own fault. I ought to have flown out at him long ago!--shown my teeth!--bitten! To hear him call me an enemy to our community! Me! I shall not take that lying down, upon my soul! Mrs. Stockmann. But, dear Thomas, your brother has power on his side. Dr. Stockmann. Yes, but I have right on mine, I tell you. Mrs. Stockmann. Oh yes, right--right. What is the use of having right on your side if you have not got might? Petra. Oh, mother!--how can you say such a thing! Dr. Stockmann. Do you imagine that in a free country it is no use having right on your side? You are absurd, Katherine. Besides, haven't I got the liberal-minded, independent press to lead the way, and the compact majority behind me? That is might enough, I should think! Mrs. Stockmann. But, good heavens, Thomas, you don't mean to? Dr. Stockmann. Don't mean to what? Mrs. Stockmann. To set yourself up in opposition to your brother. Dr. Stockmann. In God's name, what else do you suppose I should do but take my stand on right and truth? Petra. Yes, I was just going to say that. Mrs. Stockmann. But it won't do you any earthly good. If they won't do it, they won't. Dr. Stockmann. Oho, Katherine! Just give me time, and you will see how I will carry the war into their camp. Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, you carry the war into their camp, and you get your dismissal--that is what you will do. Dr. Stockmann. In any case I shall have done my duty towards the public--towards the community, I, who am called its enemy! Mrs. Stockmann. But towards your family, Thomas? Towards your own home! Do you think that is doing your duty towards those you have to provide for? Petra. Ah, don't think always first of us, mother. Mrs. Stockmann. Oh, it is easy for you to talk; you are able to shift for yourself, if need be. But remember the boys, Thomas; and think a little of yourself too, and of me-- Dr. Stockmann. I think you are out of your senses, Katherine! If I were to be such a miserable coward as to go on my knees to Peter and his damned crew, do you suppose I should ever know an hour's peace of mind all my life afterwards? Mrs. Stockmann. I don't know anything about that; but God preserve us from the peace of mind we shall have, all the same, if you go on defying him! You will find yourself again without the means of subsistence, with no income to count upon. I should think we had had enough of that in the old days. Remember that, Thomas; think what that means. Dr. Stockmann (collecting himself with a struggle and clenching his fists). And this is what this slavery can bring upon a free, honourable man! Isn't it horrible, Katherine? Mrs. Stockmann. Yes, it is sinful to treat you so, it is perfectly true. But, good heavens, one has to put up with so much injustice in this world. There are the boys, Thomas! Look at them! What is to become of them? Oh, no, no, you can never have the heart--. (EJLIF and MORTEN have come in, while she was speaking, with their school books in their hands.) Dr. Stockmann. The boys-- I (Recovers himself suddenly.) No, even if the whole world goes to pieces, I will never bow my neck to this yokel (Goes towards his room.) Mrs. Stockmann (following him). Thomas--what are you going to do! Dr. Stockmann (at his door). I mean to have the right to look my sons in the face when they are grown men. (Goes into his room.) Mrs. Stockmann (bursting into tears). God help us all! Petra. Father is splendid! He will not give in. (The boys look on in amazement; PETRA signs to them not to speak.) ACT III (SCENE.--The editorial office of the "People's Messenger." The entrance door is on the left-hand side of the back wall; on the right-hand side 