good man. No, don't go that way; Mr. Manders is just coming along. Be off down the kitchen stairs. Engstrand (moving towards the right). Yes, yes--all right. But have a bit of a chat with him that's coming along. He's the chap to tell you what a child owes to its father. For I am your father, anyway, you know, I can prove it by the Register. (He goes out through the farther door which REGINA has opened. She shuts it after him, looks hastily at herself in the mirror, fans herself with her handkerchief and sets her collar straight; then busies herself with the flowers. MANDERS enters the conservatory through the garden door. He wears an overcoat, carries an umbrella, and has a small travelling-bag slung over his shoulder on a strap.) Manders. Good morning, Miss Engstrand. Regina (turning round with a look of pleased surprise), Oh, Mr. Manders, good morning. The boat is in, then? Manders. Just in. (Comes into the room.) It is most tiresome, this rain every day. Regina (following him in). It's a splendid rain for the farmers, Mr. Manders. Manders. Yes, you are quite right. We townfolk think so little about that. (Begins to take off his overcoat.) Regina. Oh, let me help you. That's it. Why, how wet it is! I will hang it up in the hall. Give me your umbrella, too; I will leave it open, so that it will dry. (She goes out with the things by the farther door on the right. MANDERS lays his bag and his hat down on a chair. REGINA re-enters.) Manders. Ah, it's very pleasant to get indoors. Well, is everything going on well here? Regina. Yes, thanks. Manders. Properly busy, though, I expect, getting ready for tomorrow? Regina. Oh, yes, there is plenty to do. Manders. And Mrs. Alving is at home, I hope? Regina. Yes, she is. She has just gone upstairs to take the young master his chocolate. Manders. Tell me--I heard down at the pier that Oswald had come back. Regina. Yes, he came the day before yesterday. We didn't expect him until today. Manders. Strong and well, I hope? Regina. Yes, thank you, well enough. But dreadfully tired after his journey. He came straight from Paris without a stop--I mean, he came all the way without breaking his journey. I fancy he is having a sleep now, so we must talk a little bit more quietly, if you don't mind. Manders. All right, we will be very quiet. Regina (while she moves an armchair up to the table), Please sit down, Mr. Manders, and make yourself at home. (He sits down; she puts a footstool under his feet.) There! Is that comfortable? Manders. Thank you, thank you. That is most comfortable; (Looks at her.) I'll tell you what, Miss Engstrand, I certainly think you have grown since I saw you last. Regina. Do you think so? Mrs. Alving says, too--that I have developed. Manders. Developed? Well, perhaps a little--just suitably. (A short pause.) Regina. Shall I tell Mrs. Alving you are here? Manders. Thanks, there is no hurry, my dear child. Now tell me, Regina my dear, how has your father been getting on here? Regina. Thank you, Mr. Manders, he is getting on pretty well. Manders. He came to see me the last time he was in town. Regina. Did he? He is always so glad when he can have a chat with you. Manders. And I suppose you have seen him pretty regularly every day? Regina. I? Oh, yes, I do--whenever I have time, that is to say. Manders. Your father has not a very strong character, Miss Engstrand. He sadly needs a guiding hand. Regina. Yes, I can quite believe that. Manders. He needs someone with him that he can cling to, someone whose judgment he can rely on. He acknowledged that freely himself, the last time he came up to see me. Regina. Yes, he has said something of the same sort to me. But I don't know whether Mrs. Alving could do without me--most of all just now, when we have the new Orphanage to see about. And I should be dreadfully unwilling to leave Mrs. Alving, too; she has always been so good to me. Manders. But a daughter's duty, my good child--. Naturally we should have to get your mistress' consent first. Regina. Still I don't know whether it would be quite the thing, at my age, to keep house for a single man. Manders. What! My dear Miss Engstrand, it is your own father we are speaking of! Regina. Yes, I dare say, but still--. Now, if it were in a good house and with a real gentleman-- Manders. But, my dear Regina! Regina. --one whom I could feel an affection for, and really feel in the position of a daughter to... Manders. Come, come--my dear good child-- Regina. I should like very much to live in town. Out here it is terribly lonely; and you know yourself, Mr. Manders, what it is to be alone in the world. And, though I say it, I really am both capable and willing. Don't you know any place that would be suitable for me, Mr. Manders? Manders. I? No, indeed I don't. Regina. But, dear Mr. Manders--at any rate don't forget me, in case-- Manders (getting up). No, I won't forget you, Miss Engstrand. Regina. Because, if I-- Manders. Perhaps you will be so kind as to let Mrs. Alving know I am 